Title: Contemporary approach to cardiogenic shock care: a state-of-the-art review
Authors: Jamie L W Kennedy, Michael C Flanagan, Daniel G Tang, Katherine M Klein, Shashank S Sinha, Lindsey Cilia, Aditya Mehta, Vanessa Blumer, Alexander G Truesdell, Andrew H Nguyen, Behnam N Tehrani, Ilan Vavilin, Carolyn M Rosner, Hala Moukhachen, Mehul Desai, Aditya Dewanjee, Wayne B Batchelor, Shashank S Desai, Anika Raja, Mitchell A Psotka, Palak Shah, Iyad N Isseh
Organizations: 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
3Department of Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States, 
1Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, United States
Text:
Cardiogenic shock (CS) is a time-sensitive and hemodynamically complex syndrome with a broad spectrum of etiologies and clinical presentations. Despite contemporary therapies, CS continues to maintain high morbidity and mortality ranging from 35 to 50%. More recently, burgeoning observational research in this field aimed at enhancing the early recognition and characterization of the shock state through standardized team-based protocols, comprehensive hemodynamic profiling, and tailored and selective utilization of temporary mechanical circulatory support devices has been associated with improved outcomes. In this narrative review, we discuss the pathophysiology of CS, novel phenotypes, evolving definitions and staging systems, currently available pharmacologic and device-based therapies, standardized, team-based management protocols, and regionalized systems-of-care aimed at improving shock outcomes. We also explore opportunities for fertile investigation through randomized and non-randomized studies to address the prevailing knowledge gaps that will be critical to improving long-term outcomes.
Keywords: acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, cardiogenic shock, pulmonary artery catheter, shock team
Cardiogenic Shock (CS) is a multifactorial, hemodynamically complex syndrome characterized by profound and refractory circulatory collapse due to impaired myocardial contractility resulting in systemic hypoperfusion, metabolic acidosis, and refractory multiorgan system dysfunction (1). Despite more than two decades of advances in interventional techniques, the development of rapidly deployable temporary mechanical circulatory support (tMCS) devices, and systems-of-care strategies to treat AMI, patients with CS continue to fare poorly with 30%–50% risk of 30-day mortality and associated multiorgan dysfunction in the modern era (2–8). It was not until the landmark Should We Emergently Revascularize Occluded Arteries in Cardiogenic Shock (SHOCK) trial in 1999, however, that a strategy of early revascularization was demonstrated to improve outcomes (9, 10). While randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have failed to demonstrate clear benefit with either pharmacologic or device-based therapies, burgeoning observational research from North American CS registries have highlighted the potential merits of standardized, team-based care in improving the care of patients with CS (11–14). These studies suggest that the implementation of a multidisciplinary “Shock team,” employing early utilization of pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) hemodynamic monitoring, selective and hemodynamically tailored tMCS and comprehensive longitudinal care in an American Heart Association (AHA) Level 1 cardiac intensive care unit (CICU) may be associated with reduced in-hospital mortality. The heterogeneity of clinical presentations, complex hemodynamic perturbations, therapeutic strategies, and eventual outcomes delineates the inadequacy of a one-size-fits-all CS management algorithm. In this narrative review, we discuss the pathophysiology of CS, the phenotypes and evolving definitions to risk stratify this disease state, the gamut of pharmacologic and device-based therapies currently available, and potential treatment protocols and systems-of-care strategies to enhance outcomes in this condition. Finally, we discuss opportunities for fertile investigation to address the prevailing knowledge gaps that persist in this disease.
CS remains the most common type of shock in patients admitted to the CICU in the contemporary era (15, 16). Historically, CS was seen as a primary disorder caused by LV dysfunction resulting from AMI. However, in recent years, acute decompensation of chronic HF has been recognized as the most common underlying etiology, contributing up to >50% of the admissions for CS (15). Numerous single and multi-center studies have reported the increasing prevalence of non-AMI CS (15–19). This paradigm shift may be attributed to increased use of preventive therapies and the concomitant decline in AMI incidence, early revascularization strategies in AMI patients leading to decreased incidence of resultant CS, and improved AMI survival in patients sustaining significant irreversible ischemia, resulting in more survivors with chronic HF due to LV dysfunction (20, 21). Patients are now living longer because of declining mortality from AMI-CS (18, 19). Among 1,254,358 CS admissions from the National Inpatient Sample (NIS) from 2004 to 2018, there was a more than threefold increase in the number of hospitalizations accompanied by a substantial 25% reduction in in-hospital mortality (from 49% to 37%) during the study period (22).
Healthcare costs have burgeoned revealing the inexorable financial toll of CS on both individual patients and healthcare systems. In one retrospective observational study of the NIS population from 2000 to 2014, Vallabhajosyula et al. reported a median cost of hospitalization of $80,346 for AMI-CS and $183,767 for CS-associated multiorgan failure hospitalizations (23). A single-center retrospective study of 230 patients reported the cost of AMI-CS hospitalization was more than five times that of AMI without CS, mostly (80%) due to the use of invasive procedures and device usage in the ICU (24). The financial outlay extends beyond the index hospitalization phase, as higher CS—associated readmission rates and progressive disease result in costly follow-up care. Re-hospitalizations contribute to the already elevated cost burden, with 30-day readmission rates nearing 19% and a median cost of nearly $10,000 per readmission (25).
The pathophysiology of CS is a complex and vicious cycle often culminating in multiorgan failure and death. Initiated by a progressive impairment in ventricular contractility, CS leads to a critical reduction in mean arterial pressure (MAP) and cardiac output (CO), resulting in systemic hypoperfusion and decreased coronary perfusion pressure with compensatory activation of baroreceptors and chemoreceptors in an attempt to maintain hemodynamics and perfusion (1, 26, 27). Arterial- and veno-constriction occur as a result of baroreceptor and chemoreceptor activation, causing an increase in vascular resistance with blood distribution away from splanchnic circulation and elevating pulmonary venous and central venous pressure (CVP); these mechanisms result in multiorgan congestion, often exacerbating preexisting volume overload seen in patients with HF, and further compromise end-organ perfusion represented by worsening lactic acidemia (28, 29). In response to tissue ischemia, a state of systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) ensues which leads to systemic vasodilation and inflammation in an already dysfunctional myocardium—propagating the progressive maladaptive spiral of CS (11, 30).
The two most commonly recognized etiologies of CS are AMI-CS and HF-CS (11). AMI-CS is typically associated with injury to >40% of the LV myocardium but can also be precipitated by mechanical complications such as ventricular septal defect and free wall or papillary muscle rupture (31). Analysis of pressure-volume loop curves in AMI-CS show a rightward and downward shift of the end-systolic pressure volume relationship suggesting a sudden reduction in LV contractility resulting in reduced stroke volume (SV), CO, and MAP and increases in pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) and CVP (26, 32). These hemodynamic changes reflect the canonical clinical course for patients with AMI-CS, often beginning with hypotension from the acute ischemic insult leading to hypoperfusion and culminating with congestion. In contrast, HF-CS often follows a more indolent clinical course, usually presenting with congestion in acute on chronic HF-CS phenotypes leading to hypoperfusion and ending with systemic hypotension (11, 26).
Despite varying definitions in clinical trials, CS has been historically described as a state of systemic hypoperfusion due to impaired myocardial contractility, typically with associated hypotension (systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg for a prolonged duration usually extending >30 min) (2, 4, 9). Patients may also clinically present in a state of isolated hypoperfusion, in which they are normotensive due to compensatory system vasoconstriction, but may still have hemodynamic and biochemical evidence of malperfusion (33). This underrepresented and poorly studied patient population was first reported in the SHOCK Trial registry with a 43% in-hospital mortality (34). Recognizing the need to evolve from binary determination of CS, which does not adequately describe the spectrum and myriad of etiologies and phenotypes or the varied clinical presentations of shock, a multidisciplinary workgroup at the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Intervention (SCAI) established a five stage (A to E) classification system for CS in 2019, encompassing the full spectrum of the syndrome based on physical examination findings, laboratory markers, and invasive hemodynamics (35). The SCAI classification system has undergone retrospective and prospective validation in several single center and multicenter registries, with the most recent iteration published in 2022 emphasizing the presence of cardiac arrest with coma as an adverse effect modifier, dynamic baseline and maximum SCAI staging and serial re-staging, and treatment intensity to stratify risk (7, 36–38).
In the SCAI taxonomy, each stage of CS severity is defined by biochemical, physical exam, and hemodynamic findings with the development of tissue hypoperfusion, end-organ dysfunction, and the need for hemodynamic support heralding the transition from pre-shock (Stage B) to later stages (C-E) (35). In 2022, SCAI proposed the addition of a 3-axis model of CS evaluation and prognostication to SCAI staging, recognizing the dynamic nature of shock, and serving as a reminder to individualize patient care based on risk modifiers, clinical phenotype, and comorbidities (37).
More recently, the Cardiogenic Shock Working Group (CSWG) has proposed a pragmatic revision to the SCAI classification to allow for patient risk-stratification using consistent and uniform definitions (36). Utilizing data from 3,455 patients across 17 hospitals from 2016 to 2021, the SCAI-CSWG classification provides specific threshold values to define hypotension (SBP and MAP) and hypoperfusion [lactate, alanine transaminase (ALT), pH] across all stages, and incorporates other relevant variables including treatment intensity (number of vasoactive agents, inotropic therapy, and acute MCS devices) and out-of-hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA). In brief, under the newly refined classification, SCAI-CSWG Stage A is a broad representation of a myriad of hemodynamically stable patients with known cardiac diagnoses which place them at risk for CS. SCAI-CSWG Stage B patients are defined as having either isolated hypotension (SBP 60–90 mmHg or MAP 50–65 mmHg) or hypoperfusion (lactate 2–5 mmol/L or ALT 200–500 U/L) without the need for drug or device therapy. SCAI-CSWG Stage C represents the more “classic CS” patients with hypoperfusion (lactate 2–5 mmol/L or ALT 200–500 U/L) and hypotension (SBP 60–90 mmHg or MAP 50–65 mmHg) or requiring one drug or tMCS device. SCAI-CSWG Stage D patients represent those deteriorating despite initial therapies who remain hypotensive (SBP 60–90 mmHg or MAP 50–65 mmHg) with signs of worsening hypoperfusion (lactate 5–10 mmol/L or ALT >500 U/L) requiring 2–5 treatment-intensive drugs or tMCS devices or have persistent hemodynamic instability on one drug or device. Lastly, SCAI-CSWG Stage E, or extremis shock, represent patients with (1) refractory hypotension (SBP <60 mmHg or MAP <50 mmHg), (2) refractory hypoperfusion (lactate >10 mmol/L), (3) requiring >3 drugs or tMCS devices, or (4) suffering an OHCA with coma. One significant difference between the original proposed SCAI system and the new SCAI-CSWG nomenclature centers around the definition of Stage B (beginning) shock, the latter allowing for earlier recognition and more reliable capture of patients with normotensive hypoperfusion—a largely unrecognized entity increasingly identified as an independent risk factor for CS mortality (36). In this manner, the SCAI-CSWG classification provides a granular, uniform taxonomy for risk stratification to delineate the temporal progression of CS across SCAI Stages (36).
Invasive hemodynamic assessment may also be useful in the classification of CS. The original Diamond-Forrester nomenclature initially proposed binary classification of HF patients with respect to perfusion and congestion based on the initial cardiac index and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) assessments, respectively (39–41). Modern day hemodynamic profiling of CS has become more nuanced, further classifying CS with distinct congestive profiles including “LV-dominant”, “RV-dominant”, and “biventricular (BiV)” shock profiles (33). LV-dominant CS is characterized by reduced LV function with elevated PCWP and normal or reduced CVP, while RV-dominant CS is characterized by elevated CVP with relatively preserved LV function and normal to low PCWP and pulmonary artery pressure. Lastly, as the name suggests, BiV shock is characterized by reduced LV function with elevated right and left cardiac filling pressures (1, 35). A sub-study of SHOCK registry reported similar in-hospital mortality in patients with RV vs. LV shock (53% vs. 61%, p = 0.30) (42). However, recent literature suggests that BiV shock is not only the most commonly observed profile out of the three congestive entities but also is a significant independent predictor of mortality when compared to LV congestion profile [aOR 2.4 (95% CI 1.4–3.7)] or no congestion [aOR 2.1 (95% CI 1.1–4.0)], and not necessarily driven by RV predominant shock (43).
With an aging population and associated frailty syndromes, up to 10% of patients presenting with AMI are likely to not only have profound hemodynamic perturbations, but also complex coronary artery disease (CAD), to include multivessel disease, chronic total occlusions and calcified vasculature (2, 44, 45). In patients with pre-existing CAD, even small ischemic injuries can precipitate CS, jeopardizing up to 40% of myocardial mass (46). Initially coined a “downward spiral” by Hollenberg in 1999, the central pathophysiologic premise of AMI-CS is an ischemic insult from an acute coronary thrombosis resulting in regional myocardial necrosis, impaired cardiac output due to concomitant systolic and diastolic dysfunction, elevated intracardiac filling pressures and reflexive sympathetic activation resulting in systemic vasoconstriction and heightened afterload (47). The timing of CS onset following AMI is variable, with a post-hoc analysis of the SHOCK Trial registry reporting a median time from AMI symptoms to CS onset of 6 h, with the greatest delay in patients in which the left anterior descending artery was the culprit vessel (48). Up to 20% of patients with AMI-CS may also develop refractory and non-infectious SIRS, due to the upregulation of nitric oxide synthetase and associated cytokines (49). These patients are at increased risk for non-cardiac organ dysfunction as well as higher in-hospital and one-year mortality rates across the CS severity spectrum. Lastly, patients with AMI may develop CS due to mechanical complications, such as ventricular septal defects, papillary muscle rupture with consequent severe mitral regurgitation, and free wall rupture (50). The landmark SHOCK Trial fundamentally altered our understanding and treatment approach to AMI-CS after it demonstrated a 13% absolute reduction in all-cause mortality at one year in patients undergoing revascularization (10). The prognostic relevance of timely invasive reperfusion in this patient population was further reinforced by the findings of the Feedback Intervention and Treatment Times in ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (FITT-STEMI) trial which demonstrated every 10 min treatment delay was associated with 3 additional deaths per 100 patients with AMI-CS undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) (51). The classic term “golden hour” was coined by R. Adams Cowley in 1975 where he stated, “the first hour after injury will largely determine a critically injured person’s chances for survival.” This “golden hour” in CS management must include prompt identification followed by timely revascularization, resuscitation, and admission to CICU for escalating levels of care as appropriate (52). While the term “door to balloon” (D2B) is pertinent for ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) cases, in the realm of CS, the analogous “shock to support” (S2S) and “shock to perfusion” (S2P) durations have yet to be established. These timelines reflect the window for restoring adequate blood pressure and preventing multiorgan failure, comparable to the urgency of re-establishing coronary blood flow in STEMI patients. Basir et al. demonstrated the impact of early intervention on associated survival rates. Initiating tMCS within 1.25 h of shock onset yielded a survival rate of 66% in contrast to 26% when tMCS was initiated beyond 4.25 h (53). Despite advances in interventional therapies and systems-of-care strategies for the treatment of STEMI, AMI-CS continues to pose a challenge to health systems and clinicians worldwide given its multiorgan system ramifications (54).
Prompt recognition of CS by emergency medical services (EMS) personnel and emergency department providers is key to ensuring timely treatment of patients with AMI with circulatory collapse. Steps to expedite the care of AMI-CS include early 12-lead electrocardiogram acquisition, administration of vasopressors (preferably norepinephrine and avoidance of phenylephrine) to achieve MAP >65 mm Hg, mechanical ventilation, point-of-care echocardiography to assess for mechanical complications, and immediate transfer to a primary PCI-capable facility (55–58). While patients with SCAI Stages A or B AMI-CS may proceed directly to cardiac catheterization laboratories (CCL), those with SCAI stage C or D may first require adjunctive stabilization measures while also mitigating any significant delays to invasive reperfusion (59). For patients with SCAI stage E AMI-CS, particularly those without ST-segment elevation, and who may have had prolonged out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, refractory ventricular arrhythmias and severe lactic acidosis with unfavorable prognosis, careful multidisciplinary team review of expected prognosis and elucidation of prior patient wishes and goals of care is warranted, often followed by formal palliative care consultation (60, 61).
Transradial access has now been recognized as the default approach for coronary angiography and PCI for patients with acute and chronic coronary syndromes following clinical trial data demonstrating reductions in major bleeding and vascular complications as compared to the femoral approach (62–64). These findings have been similarly noted in patients with AMI-CS (65). It is recognized, however, that AMI-CS is an important predictor of transradial access failure, as these patients have systemic constriction and are often receiving vasoactive therapies. They may also concomitantly require large bore access to facilitate implantation of tMCS (66). Therefore, if radial access is challenging or tMCS is required, concerted efforts should be made to employ safe femoral access using contemporary multimodality imaging techniques (67). The core elements of “vascular safety bundles” include routine ultrasound and fluoroscopic guided micropuncture access, pre-and post-procedure run-off angiography, and validated hemostatic protocols (68). In select patients with peripheral vascular disease or severely constricted lower extremity vessels, further measures may be undertaken to mitigate the risk for bleeding and vascular complications. These include upstream SHiP (Single access for High Risk PCI) in patients supported with Impella CP (Abiomed, Danvers, MA) and use of distal perfusion catheters in patients requiring downstream tMCS who are at risk for acute limb ischemia (68, 69).
Multiple factors pose a challenge to achieving prompt, safe, and consistent antithrombotic effects in AMI-CS including but not limited to: (1) impaired absorption of oral P2Y12 inhibitors due to microcirculatory dysfunction and opioid induced enteral dysmotility; (2) platelet dysfunction due to hypothermia during targeted temperature control (TTC), microcirculatory thrombosis, myeloid dysfunction and acute renal failure; (3) impaired cytochrome P450-dependent activation of clopidogrel due to hepatosplanchnic malperfusion; and (4) bleeding and vascular complications due to large bore access (59). To date, recommendations for antiplatelet and antithrombotic treatments in AMI-CS have been extrapolated from patients with hemodynamically stable acute coronary syndrome, given limited efficacy data in CS (70). Given the high burden of hepatic and renal failure in CS with associated risk for inconsistent pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, the AHA Position Statement on CS and European guidelines recommend the use of unfractionated heparin as the anticoagulant of choice due to its rapid offset and reversibility (1, 71).
Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and oral P2Y12 inhibition is the mainstay of contemporary antiplatelet therapy in patients with AMI. The newer generation P2Y12 inhibitors prasugrel and ticagrelor, in crushed formulations, are generally the preferred oral agents because of their rapid onset of action and favorable pharmacodynamics compared to clopidogrel (72–75). In circumstances where oral bioavailability may be limited, use of the intravenous P2Y12 inhibitor cangrelor to bridge the gap in platelet inhibition may be warranted. With the ability to achieve steady state concentration within 2 min of infusion and a half-life of less than 6 min, cangrelor has been studied in cardiac arrest patients and has been demonstrated to impart more consistent platelet inhibition without increased risk for bleeding compared to oral agents (76). The Dual Antiplatelet Therapy for Shock Patients with Acute Myocardial Infarction trial (DAPT-SHOCK-AMI) (ClinicalTrial.gov: NCR03551964) is an ongoing multicenter randomized study comparing the primary clinical and laboratory endpoints of 30-day death/myocardial infarction/stroke and ADP-induced platelet aggregation between cangrelor and ticagrelor in AMI-CS. There is limited data regarding the clinical utility of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors in AMI-CS, with concurrent class IIa recommendation in select non-CS AMI patients with high thrombus burden, no-reflow phenomenon or abrupt periprocedural vessel closure (63, 77).
Up to 80% of patients with AMI-CS will have multivessel CAD, an independent predictor of morbidity and mortality in this patient population (78). Despite clinical precedent favoring coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) in patients with ischemic left ventricular dysfunction, less than 7% of shock patients undergo surgical revascularization given their elevated risk for perioperative morbidity and mortality (21, 79). Notwithstanding the merits of complete revascularization in patients with hemodynamically stable acute coronary syndromes, gaps remain in knowledge regarding the extent of revascularization strategies that most benefit patients with AMI-CS (80). To date, only one large, multicenter randomized clinical trial has addressed this issue. The Culprit Lesion Only PCI vs. Multi-vessel PCI in Cardiogenic Shock (CULPRIT-SHOCK) trial demonstrated a 17% absolute reduction in the primary endpoint of 30-day death or renal replacement therapy with culprit-vessel PCI (2). Similar findings were noted at one year, with the caveat that the culprit revascularization cohort had higher rates of heart failure rehospitalization and repeat revascularization during this intermediate time period (81). The applicability of this study’s findings to real world practice has been challenged, as fewer than one-third of all patients had tMCS and nearly one-quarter of the multivessel cohort also underwent PCI of coronary chronic total occlusions, a practice that has not been demonstrated to improve cardiac function in non-CS patient with acute coronary syndrome (82). A recent sub-study of the National Cardiogenic Shock Initiative (NCSI), for instance, showed no differences in in-hospital mortality, acute kidney injury and length of stay in patients with AMI-CS undergoing multivessel PCI when Impella was implanted prior to revascularization (83). The US and European guidelines have nevertheless downgraded the practice of ad-hoc multivessel PCI in AMI-CS to a Class III recommendation based on the CULPRIT-SHOCK findings (63, 64). Similarly, there is a paucity of data regarding coronary stent platforms in AMI-CS (84). However, iterative advances in drug elution pharmacokinetics and emerging data suggest ischemic equipoise with attenuated bleeding risk in select high-risk patients undergoing PCI; drug-eluting stents are preferred over bare-metal stents in patients undergoing PCI (85).
In the last decade, HF-CS has been recognized as a distinct etiology which varies from AMI-CS not only in terms of pathophysiology and clinical presentation but also with respect to acute management and long-term prognosis (17). The pathophysiology of HF—CS also varies depending on de novo vs. acute on chronic HF-CS subtypes. Chronic HF primarily manifests as congestion due to cardiac dysfunction involving increased systemic vascular resistance and redistribution of blood from the splanchnic circulation as previously discussed. These changes, including venoconstriction and elevated CVP, contribute to organ congestion, impaired renal function, and hepatic dysfunction (26). Over time, cardiovascular and muti-organ adaptations to these derangements allow patients with chronic HF to tolerate conditions that would be critically dangerous if they occurred suddenly (86). When ventricular function is severely impaired, chronic HF progresses to HF-CS, resulting in worsening hypoperfusion and subsequent acute on chronic hepatic and renal injury, lactic acidosis, reduced coronary perfusion, and further activation of baroreceptors and chemoreceptors. These factors create a vicious cycle that worsens cardiac function, and the body enters a state of systemic inflammatory response syndrome culminating in multiorgan failure and death.
Initial assessment of HF-CS should include identifying the underlying etiology of HF-CS, the severity of CS using the SCAI stage definitions, and determining the hemodynamic congestive profile. Based on the recent CSWG observational data, 90% of the patients with SCAI B deteriorated to a higher SCAI stage (i.e., C/D/E) during the course of their index hospitalization; the mean time to achieving the maximum SCAI stage was 52 h (36). Hence, early institution of PA catheter guided hemodynamic management may be useful in identifying worsening HF-CS patients sooner and potentially lead to improved outcomes (87, 88). Patients with worsening hypotension and hypoperfusion with elevated lactate levels and evidence of end-organ dysfunction should be transferred to dedicated AHA Level 1 cardiac ICUs with invasive hemodynamic monitoring to reduce the risk of progression to hemometabolic HF-CS. Zweck and colleagues described this phenotype of HF-CS patients with near complete loss of compensatory reflex mechanism to maintain CO combined with multiorgan failure as hemo-metabolic HF-CS, and this subset of patients carry the highest risk of mortality among various HF-CS phenotypes (89).
Elevated filling pressures have been recognized as a strong predictor of adverse outcomes as opposed to CO alone in the advanced HF population (90). Co-administering loop diuretics with thiazides and thiazide-like diuretics (distal sodium reabsorption blockade) or with acetazolamide (proximal sodium reabsorption blockade) can overcome diuretic resistance via sequential nephron blockade and help attain successful decongestion (euvolemia) as shown in the ADVOR (Acetazolamide in Acute Decompensated Heart Failure with Volume Overload) trial, albeit in HF patients without CS (91).
For patients experiencing clinical deterioration and failing to meet hemodynamic goals despite initial therapeutic interventions, a selective and tailored approach to MCS device selection is recommended based on the severity of HF-CS with the goal of achieving hemodynamic unloading and restoring systemic perfusion (59). The application of MCS should be contextualized within a broader strategy aimed at either bridging the patient to advanced therapies or facilitating myocardial recovery. However, it is imperative to exercise caution when considering MCS use if exit strategies are not available; palliative care consultation should be considered if not concurrently pursued. A detailed review of temporary MCS, including IABP, Impella CP and Impella 5.5, and VA ECMO is provided in the sections below.
Team-based interventions have been shown to expedite care and improve outcomes for a number of high-mortality conditions, such as trauma, cardiac arrest, sepsis and stroke (92–95). The initial experience and feasibility of a team-based approach to CS was first described at the Mayo Clinic in Arizona, where mobile ECMO teams consisting of a cardiac surgeon, perfusionists and critical care nurses were deployed to the community to rapidly resuscitate and stabilize patients in refractory circulatory collapse with VA-ECMO and to transfer them back to local tertiary care center for follow-on care (96). These patients fared better than those stabilized at the community hospital, with survival to discharge of 56% vs. 30%, respectively (96). Given these initial favorable findings and recognizing the time-sensitive clinical nature of CS, researchers issued a clarion call to action in 2015 for centers to employ multidisciplinary “shock teams” in the care of patients with refractory hemodynamic compromise (97). Since then, several dedicated single center shock registries have published their findings following implementation of institutional shock teams, demonstrating associated improvements in short-term outcomes across the severity spectrum and phenoprofiles of CS (Table 1) (11–14). Clinical researchers at Inova Health System were among the first in the country to adopt this care paradigm for patients with both AMI-CS and HF-CS, demonstrating a significant associated improvement in 30-day survival (77% in 2018 vs. 47% in 2016; p < 0.001) following implementation of a one-call shock team activation, hemodynamically driven protocols for drug and device-based selection, and institutional best practices around vascular access and closure (11). The Critical Care Cardiology Trials Network (CCCTN), a multicenter collaborative of North American Level 1 CICUs, similarly showed favorable outcomes in 10 out of 24 sites with standardized team-based approached to CS, with significant reductions in CICU mortality (23% vs. 29%; aOR 0.72; 95% CI: 0.55–0.94; p = 0.016) and enhanced utilization of PACs and advanced MCS compared to centers without dedicated shock teams (98). Based on the amalgam of this observational data, the 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA HF guidelines have awarded a class IIa recommendation for the utilization of multidisciplinary shock teams in the triage and follow-up care of patients with CS (99).
Clinical studies evaluating outcomes in cardiogenic shock after implementation of standardized team-based approach.
Rapid CS recognition
Early MCS
RHC thresholds after 24h: lactate <3, CPO >0.6W, PAPi >1.0
30-day survival (p < 0.01): 47% (pre-CS team) to 77% at 2 years.
Age ≥71
DM
Dialysis
≥36 h of vasopressor use At 24 h:
Lactate ≥3.0 mg/dl
CPO <0.6 W
PAPi <1.0 Score (30-day mortality)
LVEDP
LHC +/- PCI
tMCS consideration
Urgent RHC
Urgent RHC
tMCS consideration
+/- LHC
IABP: 30%
Impella: 33%
VA-ECMO: 9%
Combination: 28%
Increased in-hospital survival (61% vs. 48%, p 0.04)
Decreased 30-day all-cause mortality (HR 0.61, 95% CI: 0.41–0.93)
Shock to support time and mean duration of MCS was not significant
CS identification and confirmation
Resuscitation and medical optimization
tMCS evaluation and initiation
OHT, LVAD evaluation
In-hospital survival 69% vs. 61% (p = NS)
30-day survival 72% vs. 69% (p = NS)
Increased cumulative survival (HR = 0.53, 95% CI: 0.28–0.99, p = 0.03)
Early identification of CS RHC hemodynamics
MCS use pre-PCI
Shock to support time <90 mins
Ensure TIMI 3 flow
Complete revascularization
CPO >0.6 W
PAPi >0.9
74% pre-PCI
7% during PCI
19% post-PCI
Survival to discharge 72%
Maintained CPO >0.6 W in 62%
Door to support time: 85 ± 61 min
Age ≥70
Creatinine ≥2
Lactate ≥4
CPO <0.6
Shock team: 44%
No shock team: 56%
Rapid identification of CS etiology (AMI vs. non-AMI) and phenotype (LV, RV, BiV)
tMCS use (type of and total number)
PAC use
SOFA score, lactate, and creatinine on CICU admission
Overall: 35% (vs. 43%)
Within first 24 h: 60% (vs. 52%)
IABP 58% (vs. 72%)
Impella 28% (vs. 16%)
VA-ECMO 9% (vs. 11%)
PAC use: 60% (vs. 49%)
CICU mortality 23% (vs. 29%, p = 0.016)
Advanced MCS use 53% (vs. 43%, p = 0.005)
New RRT 11% (vs. 19%, p < 0.001)
AMI-CS, acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock; CICU, cardiac intensive care unit; CPO, cardiac power output; CS, cardiogenic shock; DM, diabetes mellitus; HF-CS, heart failure complicated by cardiogenic shock; HR, hazard ratio; IABP, intra-aortic balloon pump; LVEDP, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure; LHC, left heart catheterization; LVAD, left ventricular assist device; MCS, mechanical circulatory support; NS, nonsignificant; OHT, orthotopic heart transplantation; PAC, pulmonary artery catheter; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; PAPi, pulmonary arterial pulsatility index; pVAD, percutaneous ventricular assist device; RHC, right heart catheterization; RRT, renal replacement therapy; STEMI, ST-elevation myocardial infarction; VA-ECMO, veno-arterial extra corporeal membrane oxygenation; W, watts.
Addressing regional disparities in management and outcomes remains a major knowledge gap in CS care (59, 100). The 2017 AHA scientific statement on CS endorsed a systems of care approach to management, through the development of regionalized shock networks promoting interhospital collaboration and centralized care at regional destination centers using time-sensitive transfer protocols (1). A tiered-based approach to CS care has been correspondingly described to categorize centers based on the local levels of interventional, surgical, and critical care expertise (55). In these proposed networks, level 1 or “hub” institutions are tertiary or quaternary care centers with 24/7 PCI capabilities, cardiothoracic surgery, and advanced MCS availability. These centers employ “high-intensity” CICUs which are often co-managed by critical care cardiologists and intensivists and provide multiorgan system services and durable cardiac replacement therapies. Level 2 and 3 hospitals, referred to as “spoke” centers, have more limited resources, with the former capable of providing primary PCI services and limited temporary MCS such as IABP, and the latter equipped with emergency medical departments, general medical intensive care units and advanced cardiovascular life support capabilities (Figure 1) (55). Clinical investigators at Inova Health System were among the first in the country to implement and publish an integrated shock network with 34 partnering spoke shock care centers in the Washington DC-Maryland-Virginia region. Through collaboration and integration of care protocols between providers at the spoke institutions and the local shock team at the level 1 center, no significant differences were noted between patients with CS, irrespective of whether they were initially triaged at a Level 1 or 2/3 center, with respect to in-hospital mortality, 30-day mortality, major bleeding complications, stroke, and 30-day major adverse cardiovascular and cerebrovascular complications (101). The 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA HF guidelines provide a class IIb recommendation for the early triage of patients with CS who are refractory to initial stabilizing measures to level 1 centers with advanced MCS and critical care expertise (99). As we continue to learn about the advancements in the field of cardiogenic shock and its implications on patient management with use of tMCS devices, the original protocol for management of CS put forth by our task force at Inova has undergone several revisions and the most recent formulation stratified by AMI-CS and HF-CS are presented in Figures 2A,B, respectively. The CS team activation and coordination protocols are presented in Supplementary Figures 1 and 2.

Central illustration. Proposed algorithm of cardiogenic shock management within a regionalized shock network by a multidisciplinary shock team. A contemporary systems of care approach for cardiogenic shock (CS) management by a multidisciplinary team in a “hub and spoke” model. This allows for timely diagnosis with early comprehensive invasive hemodynamic assessment. Early, selective, and tailored mechanical circulatory support (MCS) based on CS phenotype and congestive profiles is crucial for CS management in the modern era. This is also predicated on expedited transfer to the level 1 CS centers of excellence for team-based and comprehensive multiorgan system care. AHF, Advance Heart Failure; AMI, Acute Myocardial Infarction; CS, Cardiogenic Shock; IABP, Intra-Aortic Balloon Pump; LV, Left ventricle; LVAD, Left Ventricular Assist Device; MCS, Mechanical Circulatory Support device, SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; VA-ECMO, Veno-Arterial Extra Corporeal Membrane Oxygenation.

(A,B) schematic representation of the care pathways in the upstream and critical care management of patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI, 4a) and acute decompensated heart failure (HF, 4b) cardiogenic shock (CS) at the INOVA schar heart and vascular institute. BiV, Biventricular; CPO, Cardiac Power Output = [mean arterial pressure x cardiac output]/451; PAPi, Pulmonary Artery Pulsatility Index = [systolic pulmonary arterial pressure—diastolic pulmonary arterial pressure]/right atrial pressure; PMCS, percutaneous Mechanical Circulatory Support; SBP, Systolic Blood Pressure, other abbreviations as in Figures 1, 2.

The acute management of patients with CS requires successful augmentation of cardiac output, typically with intravenous vasopressors and inotropes (102). These agents may enhance myocardial contractility by targeting the system of myocardial calcium fluxes, modulating adrenergic receptors or through phosphodiesterase inhibition (102). Although norepinephrine is often recommended as the first-line agent of choice for treatment of AMI-CS, data from clinical trials is limited. A subgroup analysis of the SOAP-II trial showed that norepinephrine appeared superior to dopamine based on fewer deaths in the CS subgroup (103). Epinephrine was associated with higher incidence of refractory AMI-CS than norepinephrine in the OptimaCC Study (56). Milrinone was associated with greater rates of sustained hypotension and atrial arrhythmias without any difference in cardiovascular-related hospital days as compared to placebo in the OPTIME-CHF Study (104). The DOREMI (Dobutamine Compared with Milrinone) trial, a double-blind randomized clinical study comparing dobutamine with milrinone in patients with AMI and HF-related CS, did not find any differences with regard to the composite or individual end-points of in-hospital death, resuscitated cardiac arrest, non-fatal myocardial infarction, transient ischemic attack, stroke, renal replacement therapy or need for mechanical circulatory support or heart transplant between patients randomized to milrinone or dobutamine (6). Despite frequent and prolonged administration of these drugs in the treatment of patients with CS, they all may have deleterious effects on energetic efficiency, as they may further increase myocardial oxygen demand by way of refractory ischemia, arrhythmias, and vasodilatory hypotension (102). An observational analysis from the CSWG registry demonstrated that concatenation of vasoactive therapies, independent of tMCS, was associated with worse mortality. Given that multiple vasoactive and/inotropic agents are often used contemporaneously, concerted efforts should be made to properly assess the drug(s) of choice based on their effects on right and/or left ventricular congestive profiles and to minimize the total number and duration of administration of vasopressors and inotropes (59). Clinical guidelines currently endorse a Class I recommendation for the utilization of vasopressors and/or inotropes in CS in the 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA Guidelines for Heart Failure (105).
A growing body of evidence now supports routine early invasive hemodynamic assessment with PAC use for HF-CS despite initial preliminary studies failing to show benefit (11). The Evaluation Study of Congestive Heart Failure and Pulmonary Artery Catheterization Effectiveness (ESCAPE) trial, a randomized controlled trial (RCT) of 433 patients with symptomatic, recurrent HF without CS who were assigned to PAC-guided volume optimization or clinical assessment alone failed to demonstrate an impact of PAC use on primary composite endpoint of days alive and out of the hospital at 6 months (106). Most notably, however, the ESCAPE trial did not specifically evaluate patients with CS for whom inotropic and vasopressor therapy was frequently used or for assessment of potential candidacy for MCS (107). The eligibility criteria in the ESCAPE trial also excluded patients with severe HF decompensation, significant renal dysfunction (creatinine >3.5 mg/dl), prior use of inotropic therapy, and those with pulmonary hypertension—a subset of patients who ultimately may have benefitted most from PAC-guided therapy (107). Nevertheless, the overall use of PAC among patients with HF continued to decline from 2004 to 2014 including in patients with CS (88).
Subsequently, given the controversy and limitations of ESCAPE, there have been several registries and emerging studies advocating for the incorporation of early invasive hemodynamic monitoring as a standard of care in contemporary CS management, as PAC use may lead to earlier and more accurate identification of CS phenotyping to tailor specific medical and device-based therapies (11). A contemporary analysis of 1,531,878 CS admissions from the NIS database from 2004 to 2018 observed significant regional variations in the employment of invasive hemodynamics, with the highest rate of PAC use in the Northeast United States and in urban teaching hospitals (22). Based on these findings and subsequent negative studies, societal guidelines have provided only limited recommendations regarding the use of PACs in CS, with the 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guidelines for the management of HF providing a Class IIa recommendation for invasive hemodynamics only in select patients with HF and worsening symptoms or signs of end organ perfusion despite optimal medical therapy and a Class IIb recommendation for its use in CS (99).
There are several potential theoretical advantages to the routine use of upfront, routine invasive hemodynamics in CS which have been postulated: (1) Timely diagnosis of CS, including assessment of RV and LV congestive profiles and elucidation of SCAI classification; (2) Optimal use of hemodynamically tailored tMCS with serial follow-up assessments to inform decision making around device escalation or de-escalation; and (3) Correlation of cardiac performance with congestion to further inform risk stratification of patients with CS and multiorgan system dysfunction (33, 36). There is an emerging body of evidence suggesting that routine PAC use may be associated with improved survival in CS, particularly in patients with tMCS (11, 12, 88, 108, 109). These observational contemporary studies have demonstrated reductions in CICU- and in-hospital mortality in patients with AMI-CS and HF-CS across all SCAI stages, particularly when complete PAC data was obtained within 6 h of hospital admission and prior to tMCS implantation (88, 108). Furthermore, routine invasive hemodynamic monitoring has been a core element in contemporary CS treatment algorithms (33). For instance, the National Cardiogenic Shock Initiative (NCIS), a single-arm, prospective, multicenter registry of AMI-CS in the United States, found that using a standardized protocol emphasizing routine invasive hemodynamic monitoring and rapid initiation of tMCS resulted in a 72% survival to discharge rate for patients presenting with AMI-CS (12). This was indeed achieved through an aggressive utilization of PAC (performed in 92% cases) and tMCS implanted in 74% prior to PCI. Likewise, recent outcome data analysis from the CSWG registry demonstrated that the mortality rates differed significantly between patient groups with no PAC profiling, incomplete PAC profiling, and complete PAC profiling (26). Patients in the complete PAC assessment group had the lowest in-hospital mortality rates across all SCAI stages [aOR 1.57 (95% CI 1.06–2.33), compared with no PAC assessment] (43). Furthermore, in an analysis of administrative data from the Nationwide Readmissions Database including over 230,000 hospitalizations for CS between 2016 and 2017, the use of PAC was associated with a significantly lower in-hospital mortality [aOR 0.69 (95% CI 0.66–0.72)] (110). More recent data from the CCCTN, a multicenter network of level I CICUs in the United States across 34 centers, again demonstrated that PAC use, even after adjustment for factors associated with their placement, was associated with lower mortality in all shock patients admitted to a CICU [OR 0.79 (95% CI 0.66–0.96); P = 0.017] (88). Currently, the latest European Society of Cardiology Guidelines for Acute and Chronic Heart Failure have recommended that invasive hemodynamic monitoring coupled with a standardized team-based approach may be associated with improved patient survival (111). An expert consensus statement from SCAI also stressed that defining CS phenotypes using invasive hemodynamics may help to guide therapy, particularly with respect to identifying patients who may require RV or BiV support (35).
Given that no RCTs have prospectively tested the utility of PAC use among patients with acute decompensated HF-CS (ADHF-CS), the Pulmonary Artery Catheter in Cardiogenic Shock (PACCS) trial (NCT05485376) is a registry-based trial designed by the CSWG and will test the hypothesis that early invasive hemodynamic assessment (within 6 h of randomization) and ongoing management with a PAC decreases the primary endpoint of in-hospital mortality compared to clinical management with delayed (beyond 48 h after randomization) or no PAC-guided assessment among patients with ADHF-CS (112). As a randomized, multicenter, adaptive design trial, PACCS intends to enroll 400 patients across several sites in the United States with a study duration of 4 years (112). Outside of hemodynamic monitoring in the inpatient setting, there remains a paucity of data testing the efficacy of remote hemodynamic monitoring in the outpatient setting to prevent adverse outcomes following CS hospitalization. The Hemodynamic monitoring to prevent Adverse events foLlowing cardiOgenic Shock (HALO Shock) trial (NCT04419480) is a prospective, unblinded study at the Inova Schar Heart and Vascular Institute that will test the hypothesis in a 1:1 randomized fashion that remote hemodynamic monitoring with CardioMEMS (Abbott) device implementation improves outpatient management including medication titration to prevent adverse outcomes following CS hospitalization (113). HALO Shock is a pilot study that has the potential to transform care for shock survivors with persistent congestion at high risk of subsequent morbidity and mortality following CS.
Temporary mechanical circulatory support (tMCS) devices are increasingly utilized in the management of CS worldwide. An analysis of 110,462 AMI-CS admissions from the NIS database from 2005 to 2014 demonstrated that tMCS was used in 55% of cases (114). Similar findings have been noted in European registries, yet with shifts toward greater employment of advanced tMCS platforms such as microaxial flow percutaneous ventricular assist devices (pVAD) and veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) (115). To date, RCTs evaluating pVAD and VA-ECMO in AMI-CS have not demonstrated an improvement in short-term outcomes compared to either medical therapy or conventional IABP counterpulsation (3–5). Recent large scale administrative claims data studying the use of pVADs in AMI-CS, in fact, suggest that routine employment of these devices in the management of CS patients may be associated not only with increased risk for short-term and one-year mortality, but also major bleeding complications, acute kidney injury, and stroke (66, 116, 117). As a result, the indications for tMCS in AMI-CS, timing of implantation, and how to best incorporate them into shock management protocols remains an evolving area of controversy, and clinical practice guidelines currently delineate the routine employment of these devices in AMI-CS care as a Class IIb (Level of Evidence: C) recommendation (44, 117). Mechanistically, tMCS devices may serve as bridging vehicles to myocardial recovery or cardiac replacement therapies by not only reducing intracardiac filling pressures and LV stroke work but also augmenting coronary and end-organ perfusion (59). Optimal tMCS device selection should be tailored to not only severity of the shock state, but also the respective congestive profiles and phenotypes, thus requiring a nuanced understanding of how each device platform can modulate right and left ventricular pressure-volume loop hemodynamics (26, 59). Given regional variations in the expertise and management of tMCS, centers caring for patients with these devices should employ standardized protocols not only around device insertion and removal, but also continuous monitoring in the CICU to mitigate the associated risks for bleeding, vascular complications, hemolysis, and afterload mismatch associated with these devices (68, 118). Ongoing trials evaluating the role of tMCS devices in CS are summarized in Table 2.
Ongoing, select clinical trials assessing the role of mechanical circulatory support devices.
LVESV, left ventricle end-systolic volume; RCT, randomized clinical trial, SoC, standard of care; other as described in preceding figures and tables.
There is emerging data from several North American CS single-center registries that select utilization of tMCS devices based on time-sensitive protocols may be associated with improved survival (12, 119, 120). The 2022 AHA scientific statement on tMCS similarly endorsed an algorithmic approach to device selection and subsequent escalation and de-escalation of tMCS using a standardized framework which integrates timely, interdisciplinary input and collaboration based on serial invasive hemodynamics, clinical, and laboratory data (121). While early implantation of tMCS device to offset or reverse the ensuing end-organ dysfunction may seem attractive, the deleterious risks associated with these devices and their potential complications needs to be appreciated given the absence of any robust RCT supporting mortality benefit from instituting tMCS (Figure 3). In select patients with increasing number and doses of inotropes and/or vasopressors, one must consider escalation to tMCS strategy in order to minimize the risk of arrhythmias and increasing myocardial oxygen demand. An interdisciplinary shock team evaluation as soon as CS is identified is of utmost importance, so that appropriate and tailored MCS device can be deployed. Although no absolute level of lactate reliably differentiates between patients with and without poor prognosis, early lactate clearance within the first 6–8 h of CS onset and/or at 24 h has shown to be more prognostic in identifying treatment responders and associated with overall improved survival (32, 122). The International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation, in collaboration with the Heart Failure Society of America, has published guidelines on employing tMCS in specific populations, including women, ACHD, the elderly and frail, as well as those who are obese. These guidelines address implementation timing, patient specific device selection, and emphasizes the importance of involving patients and their families in the decision-making process through the use of decision aids (123).

Optimizing patient-centric care: mechanical circulatory support considerations for appropriate use of selective and tailored approach to available devices. The figure illustrates the intricate process of achieving optimal patient-centered care in the context of MCS use. The achievement of the right patient, at the right time, with the appropriate MCS device, and in the right clinical setting who should be managed at an appropriate level of CS center in a regionalized shock network, is a complex endeavor influenced by a multitude of factors. AMI, Acute Myocardial Infarction; CICU, Cardiac Intensive Care Unit; CS, Cardiogenic Shock; HF, Heart Failure; LVAD, Left Ventricular Assist Device; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions.
IABP plays a crucial role in cardiac support by employing the principle of counterpulsation. These medical devices consist of balloon-mounted catheters with a volume capacity ranging from 25 to 55 cc, strategically positioned in the descending aorta. The mechanism involves inflation during diastole, which enhances central aortic root diastolic pressure and coronary perfusion. During systole, the balloon deflates, creating a negative pressure zone, consequently reducing LV afterload. This leads to a decrease in LV cardiac work and myocardial oxygen consumption while simultaneously augmenting cardiac output by up to 1 L/min. The clinical efficacy of IABPs has been explored through randomized controlled studies, almost exclusively in cases of AMI-CS (124, 125). The IABP-SHOCK II trial randomized AMI-CS patients to IABP or standard therapy and found no significant difference in 30-day mortality, leading to the conclusion that routine IABP use did not improve survival in this patient population (124). In contrast, IABPs have been associated with improved outcomes in patients with HF-CS, albeit in nonrandomized studies, serving as a bridge to durable LVAD or orthotopic heart transplantation (HT) (126–129). Notably, there is some evidence to suggest the presence of IABP-responders and non-responders. IABP insertion has shown benefits in patients with non-ischemic cardiomyopathy and higher pulmonary artery pulsatility index (PAPi) scores, indicating its potential utility in appropriate patient selection for HF-CS (126). High SVR, low cardiac index at baseline, and diabetes mellitus have also been shown to be positive predictors of IABP response (130). The ongoing AltShock-2 trial (NCT04369573) aims to address this knowledge gap by prospectively comparing IABP to vasoactive therapy in HF-CS patients, with a primary endpoint of 60-day survival or successful bridge to OHT (131).
Impella pVADs, developed by Abiomed Inc. (Danvers, MA), are catheter-based microaxial ventricular assist devices that can deliver up to 5.5 liters of cardiac output by using the principle of an Archimedes screw, harnessing the impeller’s rotational kinetic energy to displace blood from LV to aorta, thereby reducing the LV preload and oxygen consumption while increasing mean arterial pressure and tissue perfusion (132). In the U.S., Impella devices have been FDA approved to provide temporary support for 5–7 days (or 30 days for Impella 5.5), regardless of heart rate or residual LV contractility. However, limited randomized data on the efficacy of Impella on survival in CS have led to lack of endorsement from professional society guidelines, potentially causing variations in device selection and use across centers. Studies like ISAR-SHOCK and IMPRESS-in-Severe-SHOCK have compared Impella to IABP in AMI-CS (4, 132). While these studies have shown improvements in cardiac index with Impella, especially when initiated before primary PCI, they have not demonstrated reduced 30-day mortality as compared to IABP. Additionally, a meta-analysis involving percutaneous MCS devices has reported no significant mortality difference between Impella and IABP (133). However, it highlighted a higher bleeding risk associated with tMCS (134). RECOVER IV is a prospective, multicenter, randomized controlled open-label, two-arm trial with an adaptive design evaluating whether early Impella support in STEMI patients with CS prior to percutaneous intervention as compared to a non-Impella based standard of care treatment strategy reduces all-cause mortality at 30 days. Emerging interest surrounds pre-procedural LV unloading to enhance coronary reperfusion and clinical outcomes, with ongoing randomized trials investigating this novel therapeutic approach (135, 136). Impella RP Flex is a newer device specifically designed for right ventricular (RV) support, with an inlet either in the inferior or superior vena cava and an outlet in the pulmonary artery. When combined with left-sided Impella pumps, comprehensive biventricular support may be provided although this strategy has not been formally tested in clinical trials. Impella RP, the immediate predecessor of the Impella RP Flex, has shown safety and immediate hemodynamic benefits in the RECOVER RIGHT trial (137). In summary, the Impella platform of devices offer significant hemodynamic support in CS, particularly in AMI-CS cases but without any randomized data evidence of survival benefit to date. Thus, there is a need for more comprehensive clinical data to identify the appropriate patient population for timely device selection to optimize outcomes and inform clinical practice guidelines.
TandemHeart (LivaNova, Houston, TX) is percutaneously placed via a transseptal puncture for left sided support (TH-LVAD) and with ProtekDuo, supports the right side as well (TH-RVAD) (138, 139). TH can be utilized in cases such as LV thrombus and/or significant aortic regurgitation where transvalvular options are limited. By splicing an oxygenator into the circuit, it facilitates hemodynamic stabilization, perfusion, and decongestion with oxygenation analogously to VA-ECMO. Given the transseptal approach, the placement of TH-LVAD is complicated in the emergent setting and no mortality benefit has been proven for these devices yet (140, 141).
ECMO is commonly used as the first line tMCS strategy in patients with acute severe or refractory cardiac and respiratory failure. The configuration of ECMO determines whether it is providing gas exchange (veno-venous or VV-ECMO) or gas exchange with hemodynamic support (VA-ECMO) (142, 143). ECMO support can be inserted percutaneously via a large bore venous cannula inserted in a central vein which drains the de-oxygenated blood, cycles through an external oxygenator and a blood pump (centrifugal or rotational), and returns the oxygenated blood to a central artery via large bore arterial cannula. To prevent limb ischemia, a distal perfusion cannula is often used, usually placed through the superficial femoral artery and sometimes through the posterior tibial artery in a retrograde fashion. Typical access sites for VA ECMO cannulation include femoral or axillary arteries and jugular or subclavian veins (144–146). A key limitation to prolonged support with VA-ECMO is increased LV afterload which will be discussed in detail in the subsequent section. Systemic anticoagulation is needed because of the large cannula size, which exposes patients to the possibility of multiple complications; overall ECMO-associated morbidity and mortality are high. A 2014 meta-analysis of almost 1,900 patients reported up to 20% rate of lower extremity ischemia, up to 50% acute renal failure needing dialysis, and up to 40% rate of major bleeding in patients supported with VA-ECMO for CS and cardiac arrest (147). The ECMO-CS trial was recently published, comparing early VA-ECMO vs. salvage VA-ECMO in 122 patients with CS SCAI stage D or E (5). The trial enrolled around two-thirds AMI-CS patients excluding patients who were comatose after cardiac arrest. Unfortunately, the trial failed to demonstrate any significant difference between the two groups in the 30-day composite primary end point of death, resuscitated cardiac arrest, or escalation of MCS (63.8% vs. 71.2% respectively; hazard ratio, 0.72; 95% CI: 0.46–1.12); 30-day mortality did not differ (50.0% vs. 47.5%) (5). The trial had comparable but high rates of serious adverse events (60.3% vs. 61.0%). In addition, the multicenter, international EURO SHOCK trial aimed to determine if early use of VA-ECMO within 6 h (± only IABP for unloading) improves 30-day mortality in patients with persistent CS 30 min after primary PCI as compared to standard of care therapy (148). The trial aimed to enroll 428 patients but was able to enlist only 35 (13.25%) patients due to recruitment challenges amidst the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Patients with AMI complications such as ventricular septal rupture, ischemic mitral regurgitation, or LV free-wall rupture were excluded. The trial failed to demonstrate a significant difference in all-cause mortality at 30 days between the two groups (43.8% vs. 61.1%, HR = 0.56, 95% CI: 0.21–1.45, p = 0.22). The secondary outcome of major bleeding and vascular complications were numerically higher in the VA-ECMO group. Mortality at 12-months was numerically lower but statistically not significant in the VA-ECMO group (51.8% vs. 81.5%, HR = 0.52, 95% CI = 0.21–1.26, p = 0.14) (148). Given the low recruitment and limited patient enrollment, no definitive conclusions can be drawn from this trial. Most recently, the ECLS-SHOCK (ExtraCorporeal Life Support for Acute Myocardial Infarction complicated by Cardiogenic SHOCK) trial enrolled 420 patients with AMI-CS and randomized to ECLS or usual care group and reported no significant 30-day mortality difference (47.8% vs. 49.0%, p = 0.81). ECLS was associated with increased incidence of moderate or severe bleeding (23.4% vs. 9.6%, p < 0.05) (8). In light of the aforementioned studies, the optimal role of VA ECMO in AMI-CS remains to be determined.
During peripheral VA-ECMO, retrograde flow generated towards the aortic valve by the arterial cannula increases LV afterload (149). The increased afterload produces LV distension increasing wall stress and oxygen demand of the myocardium (149, 150). Elevated LV end-diastolic pressure, worsens subendocardial ischemia thereby further reducing LV systolic function (Figure 4). In AMI-CS, with competent mitral valve and non-compliant LV, the risk for LV distension is higher as compared to patients with HF-CS (i.e., in chronic decompensated HF, the LV is often dilated with mitral annular dilatation), in which the mitral valve serves as a potential “pop-off” valve and leads to acute pulmonary edema. In AMI-CS cases supported with VA-ECMO recovery can be delayed and often difficult owing to the above mechanisms. An artificially high afterload results in the inability of the aortic valve to open, LV blood stasis, and thrombus formation with the potential risk of embolization to systemic circulation. The effect of increasing LV end-diastolic pressure results in elevated LA pressures, which in turn increases pulmonary venous pressure, resulting in pulmonary edema, hemorrhage, and eventually systemic hypoxia (151). Multiple strategies for LV venting and/or unloading can be used and each have their own advantages and disadvantages (Table 3). Common practices include reducing the ECMO flow, increasing inotropic therapy, or left ventricular venting via a pVAD insertion, left atrial septostomy, and surgical venting (Table 3).

Pathophysiology of left ventricular distension during veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. The figure illustrates the pathophysiology of left ventricle (LV) distension which occurs during VA-ECMO as the outflow cannula generates retrograde flow towards the aortic valve, resulting in increased afterload. This results in high LV end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) and increased LV end-diastolic volume (LVEDV), resulting in subendocardial ischemia, hindering LV recovery. In some cases, mitral valve may act as “pop-off” valve for the LV but leads to pulmonary edema, resulting in increased PCWP, CVP, and subsequently RV distension and RV failure. LV, CVP, Central Venous Pressure; EDP, End-Diastolic Pressure; LV, Left Ventricle; PAP, Pulmonary Artery Pressure; PCWP, Pulmonary Capillary Wedge Pressure, RV, Right Ventricle. Created with BioRender.com.
Strategies for left ventricular unloading during veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
Augment Inotropes
Increases LV contractility
Enhance AV opening
May decrease afterload
Increase myocardial oxygen demand
Increase arrhythmogenic events
Increases LV work
Reducing ECMO flow
Reduces LV loading
Increases AV opening
Decreases cardiopulmonary support
IABP
Increases coronary blood flow
Decreases afterload
Can be placed at bedside
Relatively inexpensive
Can be used if LV thrombus +
No direct LV unloading
Survival benefits questionable
Risk of thrombosis, access site bleeding, atheroemboli
Contraindicated in AI
Renal failure/mesenteric ischemia due to malposition
Impella (Impella CP, 2.5, 5.5)
LV decompression
Provides antegrade flow
Hemolysis
Vascular/limb injury
Expensive
Contraindicated if LV thrombus +/moderate to severe AI/PAD
Surgical (Trans-apical, trans-pulmonary, Trans-septal)
Reliable and strong unloading
Invasive
Increased complications risk
Limited to post-cardiotomy shock
AI, aortic insufficiency; AV, aortic valve; LV, left ventricle; PAD, peripheral arterial disease.
Peripheral cannulation coupled with an LV vent using either an intra-aortic balloon pump for passive venting or Impella CP/5.5 for active unloading is a frequently employed strategy. Furthermore, surgical assist devices such as the CentriMag pump can provide full univentricular or biventricular support, approximately 5 liters per minute, for extended periods. This approach involves venting the left ventricle through an inflow cannula in the left atrium or the LV apex with an outflow cannula into the aorta (152). For right ventricular support, an inflow cannula is placed in the right atrium with an outflow cannula in the pulmonary artery. This strategy is typically reserved for patients inadequately supported by percutaneous assist devices who are awaiting heart transplantation, anticipating prolonged wait times.
The use of tMCS is associated with both bleeding and thrombotic complications, which may occur simultaneously in some patients, which may pose a challenge in finding an optimal anticoagulation and anti-thrombotic regimen. In devices such as VA-ECMO, IABP, and Impella (Abiomed Inc), use of anticoagulation is mandatory to counteract activation of the coagulation cascade caused by shear force stress and the presence of a foreign material in the body, in order to prevent device-related thrombosis and embolization. This is mostly based on pathophysiological considerations as opposed to randomized clinical trial evidence, because such trials are lacking. While on the other hand, recent large retrospective studies including patients supported by microaxial flow pumps, showed higher mortality as compared to those supported by IABP, mainly due to higher rates of major bleeding complications (66, 116). Apart form use of anticoagulation, the effect of DAPT in patients with acute coronary syndrome post PCI, or those who develop acquire von Willebrand syndrome, or vascular access-site complications, the risk of bleeding increases even further. In general, unfractionated heparin (UFH) is the anticoagulant agent of choice in patients on pVAD (153, 154). In subset of patients who develop heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), use of direct thrombin inhibitors (DTIs), such as bivalirudin or argatroban, is recommended (155, 156). When used, UFH has marked variability in its anticoagulation effect in different patients and monitoring can be challenging. Also, due to presence of comorbidities and multi-organ dysfunction in these critically ill patients, aPTT may not provide an accurate assessment of its anticoagulant effect. Therefore, parallel monitoring of anti-Xa and aPTT is considered to be superior to aPTT alone because it is not affected by other confounding factors, and has been supported by studies that show mortality increases when aPTT and anti-Xa start to diverge (154, 157–159).
Intermediate and long-term outcomes in CS patients has become an important area of investigation. The CSWG demonstrated that in-hospital mortality was significantly higher in patients with AMI-CS (39.5%) as compared to HF-CS (25.3%; P < 0.0001) despite having similar hemodynamic profiles (43). In a Nationwide Readmission Database study, there was a 16% readmission rate among 4,229 survivors of CS post-ECMO who recovered and were discharged alive (160). These patients had an in-hospital mortality rate of 10% with the most common cause of re-admission being infection followed by acute decompensated heart failure (160). Additional CS studies analyzing patients with AMI-CS and non-AMI-CS (not restricted to ECMO use), respectively, reported a higher readmission rate of 20% and 23%, respectively (161, 162). In a more recent study by our group, CS patients who survived to hospital discharge had comparable 30-day readmission rate for HF-CS and AMI-CS (19.5% vs. 24.5%; p = 0.30) (17). Our group reported similar outcomes with higher in-hospital mortality for AMI-CS when compared to HF-CS (39% vs. 24%, p < 0.001); however, in patients who survived to discharge, the one-year mortality was comparable for both groups (19.7% vs. 23.5%, p = 0.41) (17). However, limited data exists on the long-term outcomes, beyond the first year following index hospitalization of patients surviving the initial phase of CS. In the 2005 French registry of Acute ST-elevation and non-ST-elevation Myocardial Infarction (FAST-MI), 59% of patients with CS were alive at 5 years with increased risk of death in the first year after discharge (163). A recent population-based retrospective Canadian study of 9,789 AMI-CS patients showed that one-year mortality was 41% and at 5 years was around 60% (164). Among patients who survived to discharge, 48% were re-admitted to the hospital and 15% died within the first year, suggesting potential opportunities to serve CS survivors during this vulnerable phase of their illness journey (164).
Despite the wide availability of pharmacological and device-based therapies, not all CS patients may benefit from them, and the illness culminates in death for many patients (165). Palliative care services can provide social, emotional, and spiritual support to CS patients and their families and is distinguished from hospice care with its focus on controlling symptoms and improving quality of life concurrently while complementing curative therapies (1, 166, 167). Feng at al. analyzed 2017 Nationwide Readmission Database with 134,000 CS admissions with a reported mortality of 36% (168). Only 9% of CS admissions utilized palliative care services which was associated with lower 30-day readmission rate of 12% as compared to 22% in those who did not see palliative care. The hospitalization cost per patient was also lower at US $51,000 vs. $67,000, findings showing benefit not only for the individuals but also for health care systems across the US (168). Unfortunately, observational data suggest patients receiving palliative care in AMI-CS is very low at 5% in the last 15 years but there is an increasing trend toward more frequent utilization of these services (169).
There are several important knowledge gaps which provide fertile opportunities for future investigation in CS including but not limited to: electronic health alerts for early identification and recognition of CS; clinically actionable risk prediction tools; “Shock-omics” phenotyping and machine learning approaches to CS; pragmatic, registry based RCTs in CS; and longitudinal survivorship in CS.
CS is a heterogeneous syndrome with protean clinical manifestations. Rapid, early identification and stratification are of utmost importance in management of CS. The CSWG observational data indicate that 90% of SCAI B and 70% of SCAI C CS patients, respectively, progress to a higher SCAI stage during the course of their index hospitalization (36). This is particularly important as SCAI stage at admission was associated with higher in-hospital mortality, which further increased after re-classifying them at 24 h in the Altshock-2 registry (SCAI B = 18%, SCAI C = 27%, SCAI D = 63%, SCAI E = 100%), and was also an independent predictor of in-hospital mortality (170). Electronic health alerts built within the electronic medical record (EMR) interface may be useful in early identification analogous to the “sepsis alert” which is based on SIRS or Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) criteria. Application of “cardiogenic shock alert” can be considered by utilizing SCAI stages, clinical history, demographics, and hemo-metabolic markers of organ perfusion (such as lactate, renal function, transaminase levels, SBP, and/or MAP). This may potentially expedite timely diagnosis and management and transfer to a higher level of care when appropriate. However, “alert fatigue” is a common phenomenon in which clinicians often ignore EMR safety notification at a rate between 49% and 96% (171). False alerts for non-shock patients are a major cause of alert fatigue. Using Natural Language Processing (NLP) with ever-growing artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities, surveillance solutions may be able to extract information from daily documentation and refine the algorithms for “cardiogenic shock alert” systems.
Although multiple risk prediction scores have been published for AMI-CS, none are widely used in contemporary clinical practice (172). While the IABP-SHOCK II score is applicable to only AMI-CS patients, the Inova Heart and Vascular Institute (IHVI) score, CardShock risk score, and SCAI staging systems may be used more broadly in other forms of CS (Table 4) (2, 11, 19, 37, 173). Despite availability of multiple risk prediction tools, development of a unified scoring system that is capable of early prognostication to inform not only the therapeutic decisions, but also encompassing risk prediction at multiple time points and in different forms of CS has been challenging. Ideal risk scores for assessing patients with CS should be contemporary, specific to etiologies and phenotypes, and consider the evolving nature of the disease. These scores should address subphenotypes, such as acute de novo HF-CS as compared to acute-on-chronic HF cases, which may present differently. An “ideal risk score” should use readily available metrics at the initial presentation and incorporate serial data collected during the index hospitalization to refine prognostic estimates. It should also account for the patient’s response to initial treatment and potentially include novel and clinically actionable variables. For this reason, RCT populations for score derivation may not be ideal. Large, real-world multicenter CS registries may be a better source for generating risk scores. These scores should be easy to calculate at the bedside and incorporate clinical, biochemical, and hemodynamic parameters of interest. Additionally, the concept of a “futility score” is proposed to rapidly identify patients unlikely to survive, facilitating appropriate resource allocation and early engagement of palliative and hospice care (172).
Cardiogenic shock risk prediction tools.
Age >75
ACS etiology
Prior MI or CABG
Confusion at presentation
LVEF <40%
Lactate level
Age >73
Prior stroke
Glucose >191 mg/dl
Creatinine >1.5 mg/dl
Lactate >5 mmol/L
TIMI flow <3
Age ≥71
Diabetes
Dialysis
Vasopressor use (≥ 36 h)
Lactate ≥3 mg/dl
CPO <0.6 W
PAPi <1.0
Cystatin C
Lactate
Interleukin-6
N-terminal-pro-B-type natriuretic peptide
ACS, acute coronary syndrome; CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; CPO, cardiac power output; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; MI, myocardial infarction; PAPi, pulmonary artery pulsatility index; TIMI, thrombolysis in myocardial infarction score.
Machine learning approaches are rapidly emerging to elucidate the mechanisms of CS. A retrospective analysis of 1,959 patients with CS from two separate CS registries (Cardiogenic Shock Working Group and Danish Retroshock MI Registry) used machine learning approaches to identify and consecutively validate three distinct phenotypes or clusters of CS patients: “non-congested (I),” “cardiorenal (II),” and “Cardiometabolic (III).” (89) Phenotype I patients, the non-congested profile, were more likely to have lower heart rates, higher blood pressures, and lower filling pressures (right atrial pressure and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure) relative to the other phenotypes. Phenotype II patients, the cardiorenal profile, were older and more likely to have comorbidities of diabetes mellitus, chronic renal insufficiency, and hypertension. These patients were at higher odds of displaying elevated mean pulmonary artery pressures and left-sided filling pressures and consequently decreased glomerular filtration rates (GFR). This group had two- to three-fold mortality compared to phenotype I. Lastly phenotype III patients, the cardio-metabolic profile, were the sickest of all the phenotypes. This group exhibited significant elevations in biomarkers such as lactic acid and aminotransferases. Clinically, they had more profound hypotension, tachycardia, elevations in right atrial pressures, decrease in cardiac power output and cardiac index. This group had up to five-fold increase in mortality relative to phenotype I (89). Although the clustering algorithm used baseline laboratory values, the identified phenotypes showed consistent clinical differences in demographics, comorbidities, and hemodynamics. Although these findings have been validated in a CICU population, the clinical utility remains to be determined. (174), It is also unclear how these phenotypes affect prognosis and treatment decisions in contemporary clinical practice. Taken together, these findings illustrate that individualized risk stratification based on etiology and unique CS phenotype may be useful in guiding therapy and improving clinical outcomes.
Although RCTs remain the gold standard in CS, there have been numerous challenges to randomization of care and trial enrollment in critically ill CS patients. Potential reasons for these negative results in RCTs, especially in AMI-CS, include but are not limited to: (1) selection bias and failure to account for population heterogeneity; (2) inclusion of patients who are unlikely to benefit, including many cardiac arrest patients; (3) slow enrollment and low statistical power; (4) inadequate matching to shock severity and/or severity of illness; (5) enrollment after onset of multiorgan failure and irreversible sequelae of hemometabolic shock (175, 176). Observational studies have yielded conflicting results, albeit with limitations due to residual confounding, and sometimes contrary to the results of RCTs. Conducting RCTs in patients with AMI-CS is challenging due to the need for rapid informed consent from critically ill patients or their legal representatives as well as physician biases regarding equipoise with respect to the use of MCS devices. In the United States, there is a statute for Exception from Informed Consent (EFIC) under Title 21, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 50.24 (21 CFR 50.24) which allows investigators to perform “investigations involving human subjects who have a life-threatening medical condition that necessitates urgent intervention (for which available treatments are unproven or unsatisfactory), and who, because of their condition (e.g., traumatic brain injury) cannot provide informed consent.” This has not been commonly employed in CS trials to date but will be critically examined in upcoming CS trials including Recover IV.
Notably, negative findings from RCTs may mask positive treatment effects in specific subgroups, emphasizing the importance of evaluating important interactions and heterogeneity of treatment effect in subgroups in larger RCTs (175). Large-scale multinational RCTs with sufficient statistical power and inclusion of a population that closely represents real-world CS cases are crucial. While the promise of registry-based RCTs remains to be realized, there are several opportunities to heeds the lessons of recent RCTs in designing pragmatic and adaptive studies to move the field forward (176). There is a need for robust research infrastructure, inclusion of diverse patient populations, and engagement of key stakeholders in creating prospective studies with cluster randomized or stepped-wedge trial designs.
Survivors of an acute episode of CS are susceptible to the long-term ramifications of this critical illness, as compromised functional status and diminished quality of life remain pervasive (177). However, evidence suggests that despite these challenges, significant proportions of survivors maintain relatively favorable functional status and quality of life, underscoring the potential for meaningful recovery. In the SHOCK trial, 87% of patients who survived for one-year had NYHA functional class I or II (178). Another CS study estimated the total life years gained was 410 years for the 230 patients with approximately $10,000 per life year gained (24). In another series of CS patients treated with ECMO, nearly all patients managed to perform daily activities and even return to gainful employment at 1-year post-index hospitalization, attesting to the potential for successful rehabilitation (179). Recently, the IHVI Shock Registry reported a 57% survival at 1 year for HF-CS and 47% for AMI-CS based on the three year study period from 2017 to 2019 (17). Higher SCAI stage D/E and age were independently associated with 1-year mortality for both AMI-CS and HF-CS with acute decompensated heart failure as the most common cause of readmission within 30 days of discharge, irrespective of etiology. Future trials such as HALO-Shock [NCT04419480] will leverage remote hemodynamic monitoring such as Abbott’s proprietary CardioMEMS technology, an implantable pulmonary artery pressure monitoring platform, to intervene early after discharge for patients with HF-CS to assess its impact on mortality, rehospitalizations, quality of life, and biomarkers (113). Understanding and improving long term outcomes after critical illness are vitally important and efforts to promote convalescence and full recovery after critical illness, especially during the vulnerable transition phase from ICU to post discharge follow-up, should receive greater consideration (177).
CS is a complex, multifactorial, hemo-metabolic syndrome with increasing prevalence in the modern CICU. Despite significant advances in medical and device-based therapies, CS remains associated with high morbidity and mortality, especially with increasing incidence of HF-CS. Due to the protean clinical presentations and treatment options, managing these critically ill patients requires a comprehensive, standardized, multidisciplinary team-based approach, using a regionalized system of care. Future efforts should focus on phenotyping of CS and enhancing long-term outcomes in CS survivors, leveraging registry based RCTs and multicenter shock registries to determine the optimal timing for initiating therapeutic strategies, weaning tMCS, and bridging to destination strategies including durable LVAD, heart transplant, and native myocardial recovery.
The authors would like to thank Dwight and Martha Schar for their generous support of Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, and the Dudley Family for their continued contributions and support of the Inova Dudley Family Center for Cardiovascular Innovation.
We would like to express our deepest appreciation to Devon Stuart, MA, CMI who has played an instrumental role in designing and drafting several figures.
The author(s) declare that financial support was received for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Grant support to PS: NIH 1K23HL143179.
AM: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. IV: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. AN: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. WB: Writing – review & editing. VB: Writing – review & editing. LC: Writing – review & editing. AD: Writing – review & editing. MD: Writing – review & editing. SD: Writing – review & editing. MF: Writing – review & editing. II: Writing – review & editing. JK: Writing – review & editing. KK: Writing – review & editing. HM: Writing – review & editing. MP: Writing – review & editing. AR: Writing – review & editing. CR: Writing – review & editing. PS: Writing – review & editing. DT: Writing – review & editing. AT: Writing – review & editing. BT: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. SS: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
The handling editor LC declared a past co-authorship with the authors CR, SD, MP.
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcvm.2024.1354158/full#supplementary-material
Schematic representation of multidisciplinary cardiogenic shock (CS) team activation through a 1-call “shock line” to gather physicians for multidisciplinary consultation and decision making. This “shock team” can be activated by any department not only within the hospital but also across the region, to provide appropriate management for CS. CI, cardiac index; CO, cardiac output; CPO, cardiac power output; DNR, Do Not Resuscitate order; dPAP, diastolic pulmonary arterial pressure; MAP, mean arterial pressure; PAPi, pulmonary arterial pulsatility index; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; pMCS, percutaneous mechanical circulatory support; sPAP, systolic pulmonary arterial pressure; other abbreviations as in Figures 1–4.
Schematic representation of the care pathways in the upstream and critical care management of patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and heart failure (HF) cardiogenic shock at Inova Schar Heart and Vascular Institute. CI, cardiac index; CO, cardiac output; CPO, cardiac power output; DNR, Do Not Resuscitate order; dPAP, diastolic pulmonary arterial pressure; MAP, mean arterial pressure; PAPi, pulmonary arterial pulsatility index; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; pMCS, percutaneous mechanical circulatory support; sPAP, systolic pulmonary arterial pressure; other abbreviations as in Figures 1–4.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Schematic representation of multidisciplinary cardiogenic shock (CS) team activation through a 1-call “shock line” to gather physicians for multidisciplinary consultation and decision making. This “shock team” can be activated by any department not only within the hospital but also across the region, to provide appropriate management for CS. CI, cardiac index; CO, cardiac output; CPO, cardiac power output; DNR, Do Not Resuscitate order; dPAP, diastolic pulmonary arterial pressure; MAP, mean arterial pressure; PAPi, pulmonary arterial pulsatility index; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; pMCS, percutaneous mechanical circulatory support; sPAP, systolic pulmonary arterial pressure; other abbreviations as in Figures 1–4.
Schematic representation of the care pathways in the upstream and critical care management of patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and heart failure (HF) cardiogenic shock at Inova Schar Heart and Vascular Institute. CI, cardiac index; CO, cardiac output; CPO, cardiac power output; DNR, Do Not Resuscitate order; dPAP, diastolic pulmonary arterial pressure; MAP, mean arterial pressure; PAPi, pulmonary arterial pulsatility index; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; pMCS, percutaneous mechanical circulatory support; sPAP, systolic pulmonary arterial pressure; other abbreviations as in Figures 1–4.
Articles from Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine are provided here courtesy of Frontiers Media SA

==================================================

Title: Sex differences in treatments and outcomes of patients with cardiogenic shock: a systematic review and epidemiological meta-analysis
Authors: Nicole Hill, Assad Lahlou, Alex Warren, Antonis Kalakoutas, Thomas Fisher, Alastair Proudfoot, Krishnaraj Rathod
Organizations: 
1North Bristol NHS Trust, Southmead Rd, Bristol, BS10 5NB UK , 
2Royal United Hospitals Bath NHS Foundation Trust, Combe Park, Bath, Avon, BA1 3NG UK , 
3Barts Health NHS Trust, W Smithfield, London, EC1A 7BE UK , 
4Barts Health Library Services, W Smithfield, London, EC1A 7BE UK , 
3Barts Health NHS Trust, W Smithfield, London, EC1A 7BE UK , 
3Barts Health NHS Trust, W Smithfield, London, EC1A 7BE UK 
Text:
Women are at higher risk of mortality from many acute cardiovascular conditions, but studies have demonstrated differing findings regarding the mortality of cardiogenic shock in women and men. To examine differences in 30-day mortality and mechanical circulatory support use by sex in patients with cardiogenic shock.
Cochrane Central, PubMed, MEDLINE and EMBASE were searched in April 2024. Studies were included if they were randomised controlled trials or observational studies, included adult patients with cardiogenic shock, and reported at least one of the following outcomes by sex: raw mortality, adjusted mortality (odds ratio) or use of mechanical circulatory support. Out of 4448 studies identified, 81 met inclusion criteria, pooling a total of 656,754 women and 1,018,036 men. In the unadjusted analysis for female sex and combined in-hospital and 30-day mortality, women had higher odds of mortality (Odds Ratio (OR) 1.35, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.26–1.44, p < 0.001). Pooled unadjusted mortality was 35.9% in men and 40.8% in women (p < 0.001). When only studies reporting adjusted ORs were included, combined in-hospital/30-day mortality remained higher in women (OR 1.10, 95% CI 1.06–1.15, p < 0.001). These effects remained consistent across subgroups of acute myocardial infarction- and heart failure- related cardiogenic shock. Overall, women were less likely to receive mechanical support than men (OR = 0.67, 95% CI 0.57–0.79, p < 0.001); specifically, they were less likely to be treated with intra-aortic balloon pump (OR = 0.79, 95% CI 0.71–0.89, p < 0.001) or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (OR = 0.84, 95% 0.71–0.99, p = 0.045). No significant difference was seen with use of percutaneous ventricular assist devices (OR = 0.82, 95% CI 0.51–1.33, p = 0.42).
Even when adjusted for confounders, mortality for cardiogenic shock in women is approximately 10% higher than men. This effect is seen in both acute myocardial infarction and heart failure cardiogenic shock. Women with cardiogenic shock are less likely to be treated with mechanical circulatory support than men. Clinicians should make immediate efforts to ensure the prompt diagnosis and aggressive treatment of cardiogenic shock in women.
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13054-024-04973-5.
Keywords: Cardiogenic shock, Myocardial infarction, Mechanical circulatory support, Sex differences, Epidemiology
Cardiogenic shock is a complex syndrome of systemic hypoperfusion resulting from cardiac dysfunction. The observed incidence of cardiogenic shock in the United States has tripled between 2004 and 2018 [1]. Acute mortality ranges between 30–50%, despite improvements in recognition and management [2–4]. While most studies of patients with cardiogenic shock have focused on acute myocardial infarction (AMI), cardiogenic shock caused by other pathologies has become the predominant aetiology in cardiac critical care units [4, 5].
Compared to men, women appear to have higher mortality in other acute cardiovascular pathologies such as out-of-hospital cardiac arrest [6] and ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) [7], but may have a similar or even better prognosis in heart failure [8, 9]. Similarly, women with severe acute respiratory failure have been found to be more likely to die and to be ventilated with potentially injurious ventilator settings [10].
Several studies using adjusted analyses to examine the effect of sex on outcomes in cardiogenic shock have been undertaken, with some reporting higher mortality in women [11, 12], and others no difference [13–15]. Similarly, registry data show that women are less likely to receive mechanical circulatory support (MCS) than men, despite observational data suggesting they may derive greater benefit [16].
In this systematic review and meta-analysis, we aimed to assess the relationship between sex with mortality and receipt of mechanical circulatory support, adjusting for confounding factors where possible.
This epidemiological systematic review and meta-analysis was pre-registered on PROSPERO (CRD42022380480). Throughout, we followed the Meta-Analysis for Observational Studies in Epidemiology guidelines [17]. We searched Cochrane Central, PubMed, MEDLINE and EMBASE for studies reporting sex-specific mortality and treatment in patients with cardiogenic shock up to 19 April 2024. The full search strategy was developed in conjunction with a medical librarian at Barts Health NHS Trust (A.L.) and is listed in the Supplementary Appendix.
Studies were included if they met both of the following criteria: (1) Observational study or randomised controlled trial enrolling adult patients with cardiogenic shock. (2) Reported by sex at least one of: (a) unadjusted in-hospital or 30-day mortality or longer-term outcome; (b) adjusted mortality at least in-hospital or 30 days (i.e. by odds ratio or risk ratio between men and women); (c) use of MCS devices in men and women. Studies in languages other than English were included with translation as required. Case reports and non-human studies were excluded.
Mortality was extracted preferentially as 30-day mortality, then as in-hospital mortality if 30-day mortality was not reported. Studies which reported only shorter-term outcomes (e.g. ICU mortality) were not included. Studies which reported only longer-term outcomes were included only if in-hospital mortality/30-day mortality were not reported, as epidemiological studies have demonstrated that patients with cardiogenic shock who survive critical illness have relatively low rates of mortality in the first year following admission, comparable to similarly morbid patients [18, 19]. Studies reporting cohorts of patients receiving a particular treatment were included only if all, or a clear, separately reported cohort, had cardiogenic shock.
The search was carried out using Covidence software (Veritas Health Innovation, Melbourne, Australia) under licence from the University of Edinburgh. After importation of references, titles and abstracts were screened by three researchers (T.F., N.H. and A.K.). Arbitration of discrepancies and full-text review was undertaken by a separate researcher (A.W.). Multiple publications from the same dataset or study were identified manually. In order to prevent bias from multiple inclusion, only the most comprehensive study (i.e. with the lowest risk of bias, broadest acceptable inclusion criteria, longest search period and largest sample size) was included.
Bias was assessed for all studies with the Newcastle–Ottawa Score for observational cohort studies [20] by at least two of three independent researchers (T.F., N.H., A.K.) and arbitration by a fourth (A.W.). Randomised studies were assessed in the same way, given the objective was to assess the sex-related epidemiological data reported rather than bias of the randomised intervention. Definition for low risk of bias was Newcastle–Ottawa Score of ≤ 7.
Three separate analyses were conducted for the outcomes of unadjusted mortality, adjusted mortality, and mechanical cardiac support use. Data were extracted for: study size, location, study type, population, number of men, number of women, total number of included patients, nature of primary outcome, number of deaths in men, number of deaths in women, adjusted odds ratio, factors used in multivariable analysis (where reported), number of MCS devices used in men and women and nature of MCS device. Subgroup analyses were performed for aetiology of cardiogenic shock and type of mechanical circulatory support, with sensitivity analyses including only studies at lower risk of bias.
Due to the predicted high heterogeneity of included studies, we performed meta-analysis using the DerSimonian–Laird random effects model with inverse variance weighting. Data are reported as odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals. P values for the main analyses were adjusted for multiple comparison using the Holm–Bonferonni correction.
Meta-regression was conducted using the Begg–Mubazzar test and Egger’s regression analysis to assess for publication bias; in addition, funnel plots were visually inspected.
All statistical analysis was undertaken in R version 4.1.1. (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria) using package ‘metafor’ (Viechtbauer 2010).
In total, 81 studies reporting at least one sex-specific outcome were included in meta-analysis [12–16, 21–98], comprising data from eight randomised controlled studies and 73 observational cohort studies. The pooled studies contained data on 656,754 women and 1,018,036 men.
A flow diagram for the meta-analysis is given in Fig. 1. Of 4448 abstracts screened, 670 progressed to full-text review. 589 were excluded (sex-specific outcomes not reported, n = 280; multiple publications from same study or dataset, n = 195; wrong study design n = 52; wrong patient population (e.g. extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation, post-cardiotomy) n = 46; wrong outcomes n = 16). Fifteen studies were identified from the United States National Inpatient Sample with overlapping enrolment and criteria. As in the methods above, only the largest study was included [63].

PRISMA flow diagram for epidemiological meta-analysis of sex differences in cardiogenic shock
Unadjusted sex-specific mortality was reported in 56 studies including data for 617,801 women and 962,561 men (Fig. 2). Odds ratio for female sex and combined in-hospital and 30-day mortality was 1.35 (95% confidence interval 1.26–1.44, p < 0.001, τ2 = 0.031, I2 = 77.3%), Fig. 2. Pooled unadjusted mortality was 35.9% in men and 40.8% in women (p < 0.001).

Effect of sex on unadjusted in-hospital/30-day mortality in cardiogenic shock
The included data from the National Inpatient Sample (NIS) comprised 95% of the total sample size of patients; the model weight for this study accordingly was the highest at 3.9% (see Supplementary Table 1). However, sensitivity analysis excluding this study showed an almost identical result (OR = 1.34, 95% CI 1.24–1.47, p < 0.001).
Adjusted sex-specific mortality was available for 41 studies comprising 1,659,622 patients between 40 observational studies and a single randomised controlled trial (Fig. 3). Details of studies included in the adjusted analysis are given in Table 1. In total, 39 studies reported details of the regression model used to adjust the primary outcome. Of these, 38 studies adjusted for age, six for race/ethnicity, 26 adjusted for at least one comorbidity, and 13 for prior cardiac arrest.

Adjusted effect of sex on in-hospital/30-day mortality in cardiogenic shock
Characteristics of 41 studies reporting adjusted sex-specific mortality in patients with cardiogenic shock (CS)
 AMI-CS = cardiogenic shock due to acute myocardial infarction, HF-CS = cardiogenic shock due to decompensated heart failure, STEMI = ST-elevation myocardial infarction; pVAD = percutaneous ventricular assist device. (p)PCI = (primary) percutaneous coronary intervention; ECMO = extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; IABP = intra-aortic balloon pump; CA = cardiac arrest; HR = heart rate; SBP = systolic blood pressure; MV = mechanical ventilation; RRT = renal replacement therapy; LVEF = left ventricular ejection fraction; GPI = glycoprotein IIa/IIIa inhibitor; DTBT = door-to-balloon time; ECG = electrocardiogram changes; MAP = mean arterial pressure; TRA = transradial access, BMI = body mass index; HCT = haematocrit; AKI = acute kidney injury; SCAI = Society for Cardiovascular Angiographic Intervention; PAC = pulmonary artery catheter; NR = not reported
The pooled adjusted odds ratio for female sex and combined in-hospital/30-day mortality was 1.10 (95% CI 1.06–1.15, p < 0.001, τ2 = 0.005, I2 = 74.22%), Fig. 3. Whilst the largest study from the NIS again comprised the majority of the sample (90.7%), it was weighted at 8.3% in the meta-analysis, and sensitivity analysis performed with the exclusion of this study demonstrated a similar result (OR = 1.13, 95% CI 1.07–1.19, p < 0.001, τ2 = 0.012, I2 = 74.58%).
Sex-specific use of MCS was reported in 23 studies with a total of 1,559,978 patients. Overall, women were less likely to receive MCS (OR = 0.72 (95% CI 0.62–0.84, p < 0.001, τ2 = 0.10, I2 = 93.67%), Fig. 4.

Sex-specific use of mechanical cardiac support in cardiogenic shock
Nineteen studies reported sex-specific use of intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), 12 reported sex-specific use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and 9 reported percutaneous ventricular assist device (pVAD). Among these, women were less likely to be treated with IABP (OR = 0.79, 95% CI 0.71–0.89, p < 0.001, τ2 = 0.02, I2 = 65.28%) and ECMO (OR = 0.84, 95% 0.71–0.99, p = 0.045, τ2 = 0.04, I2 = 62.11% There was no significant difference seen in the use of percutaneous VAD (OR = 0.82, 95% CI 0.51–1.33, p = 0.42, τ2 = 0.39, I2 = 96.06%).
Visual inspection of funnel plots (Supplementary Fig. 1a) suggested low likelihood of publication bias for the unadjusted mortality analyses, subsequently confirmed by Begg’s (τ =  − 0.10, p = 0.23), and Egger’s tests (p = 0.62). For the adjusted mortality analysis, visual inspection of the funnel plot (Supplementary Fig. 1b) suggested moderate likelihood of publication bias, with the missing effect estimates of significantly increased mortality in women. This was not significant by Begg’s test (τ = 0.15, p = 0.16) but was by meta-regression (Egger’s test p < 0.001). The MCS analysis (Supplementary Fig. 1c) showed moderate likelihood of publication bias by Begg’s (τ =  − 0.38, p = 0.012) but not Egger’s tests (p = 0.88).
As discussed above, significant heterogeneity of studies was observed. Sensitivity analysis was performed including only studies with low risk of bias (Newcastle–Ottawa Score ≥ 7). In this sensitivity analysis (Supplementary Figs. 2–4), unadjusted OR for female sex and mortality was 1.31 (95% CI 1.22–1.41, p < 0.001, τ2 = 0.03, I2 = 78.9%), and adjusted OR for female sex and mortality was 1.09 (95% CI 1.05–1.13, p < 0.001, τ2 = 0.004, I2 = 72.5%). The OR for female sex and receipt of MCS in sensitivity analysis was 0.74 (95% CI 0.62–0.88, p = 0.001, τ2 = 0.11, I2 = 92.9%).
Two a priori subgroup analyses were specified: AMI-cardiogenic shock and heart failure cardiogenic shock (HF-cardiogenic shock). Data for 634,036 patients (254,741 females and 379,295 males) with AMI-cardiogenic shock from 45 studies were available. In females with AMI-cardiogenic shock, the unadjusted OR was 1.45 (95% CI 1.34–1.56, p < 0.001, τ2 = 0.018, I2 = 64.8%). Adjusted OR for female sex and in-hospital/30-day mortality in AMI-cardiogenic shock was 1.13 (95% CI 1.06–1.22, p < 0.001, τ2 = 0.013, I2 = 77.8%), (Supplementary Figs. 5 and 6).
Data were available for 928,263 patients with HF-cardiogenic shock (370,215 women and 558,048 men from 8 studies. In females with HF-cardiogenic shock, the unadjusted OR was 1.36 (95% CI 1.05–1.77, p = 0.021, τ2 = 0.087, I2 = 85.5%), Supplementary Fig. 7. Only three studies reported an adjusted OR for HF-cardiogenic shock patients, so meta-analysis was not performed.
In a post hoc analysis including only randomised controlled trials, consisting of 721 women and 2,040 men, the unadjusted OR for female sex and mortality was 1.39 (95% CI 1.17–1.66, p < 0.001, τ2 = 0.001, I2 = 1.55%), Supplementary Fig. 8. Mortality was higher in women in all but one study (Table 2).
Randomised controlled trials in cardiogenic shock reporting sex-specific mortality and risk ratios for intervention
RR = relative risk, NR = not reported, IABP = intra-aortic balloon pump, LV = left ventricle, ECMO = extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, pVAD = percutaneous ventricular assist device
* = RR is for refractory shock, trial stopped early due to high incidence in adrenaline group. ** = RR is for successful ECMO weaning
This is the first systematic review examining sex differences in outcome in patients with cardiogenic shock. Strengths of this study include geographically representative data, a large sample size and well-defined outcome measures (in-hospital mortality and use of MCS). The observed effect size remained present after exclusion of studies with a high risk of bias, and we undertook a rigorous process to limit inclusion of multiple publications from the same patient dataset. Our key findings are that, after adjustment for baseline characteristics, female patients with cardiogenic shock were 10% more likely to die than male patients, and 30% less likely to receive MCS. The observed difference in mortality was mirrored in sub-group analyses of AMI-cardiogenic shock and HF-cardiogenic shock.
There are multiple potential explanations for our findings, which include: (1) persistent confounding from variables not adjusted for in studies reporting adjusted analysis; (2) differences in cardiogenic shock aetiology and pathophysiology between men and women; (3) sex-related healthcare behaviours and/or systemic bias from clinicians leading to women presenting at a more advanced stage of cardiogenic shock; (4) differential therapeutic effects causing women to derive less benefit from treatments than men; and (5) implicit bias from treating healthcare professionals leading to less aggressive treatment of cardiogenic shock in women.
Included studies reported that women who develop cardiogenic shock are older [13, 15, 21, 26, 48, 63] and have more comorbidities [13, 26, 63, 72]. Men with AMI-cardiogenic shock are more likely to have obstructive coronary disease, whereas women are more likely to have non-obstructive coronary arteries with other comorbidities, which may predispose them to poorer outcomes [99]. Despite men representing most patients with AMI-cardiogenic shock, women have a higher risk of developing cardiogenic shock post-AMI compared to men. Women with obstructed coronary arteries may have more diffuse disease less amenable to angiographic intervention [100]. Given that successful revascularisation of the culprit vessel(s) is strongly associated with survival in AMI-cardiogenic shock [101], this may contribute to its increased incidence and mortality in women. Sex differences in heart failure aetiology and in cardiac function have also been described in patients with chronic heart failure [102].
It is likely that women have different aetiologies of cardiogenic shock than men. Mechanical complications of AMI such as ventricular septal defect formation and papillary muscle rupture are more common in women [103]. Several non-AMI causes of de novo heart failure are more common in women, including Takutsubo syndrome, peripartum cardiomyopathy, myocarditis and valvular aetiologies [4, 15, 33, 41, 104]. Although outcomes in different de novo aetiologies vary, with better outcomes in patients with CS secondary to Takotsubo syndrome [105], recent registry data report higher Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) scores and more common presentations of SCAI E stage of CS in de novo CS compared to acute-on-chronic HF-CS, with higher associated in-hospital mortality [106]. This may be attributed to the absence of validated treatments assessed in large randomised trials to manage such patients.
Women with cardiogenic shock may have greater shock severity at presentation. Female patients have lower systolic and diastolic blood pressure on presentation, and across all aetiologies are more likely to present in the most severe (Extremis) Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions (SCAI) stage of cardiogenic shock [14, 15, 33, 41]. This finding itself is likely multifactorial: whilst contrary to some traditional teaching, women are equally likely as men to experience ‘classical’ symptoms of STEMI with chest pain, they may be less likely to perceive these as those of a heart attack [107]. Women are less likely to be correctly diagnosed with STEMI pre-hospital and triaged to an appropriate hospital [108], and have longer symptom-to-balloon time and door-to-balloon time than men [109]. Delay in recognition of cardiogenic shock as the cause of deterioration in women is likely to correlate with worse physiological derangement at presentation.
Less aggressive treatment of women with cardiogenic shock may lead to higher mortality. Women with AMI-cardiogenic shock have been shown to be less likely to receive revascularisation [11, 109]. The data herein demonstrate that women with all-cause cardiogenic shock are less likely to receive MCS. Clinicians may be less likely to pursue MCS in women with cardiogenic shock due to their baseline differences including older age, comorbid disease and increased frailty. In some jurisdictions, women with cardiogenic shock are more often from more deprived socioeconomic groups, which may consciously or unconsciously affect decision-making [110].
The evidence base for treatment of cardiogenic shock derives almost entirely from men: the proportion of women enrolled in the eight included RCTs (Table 2) ranges from 19 to 35%. In the three trials to date which have reported a survival benefit from an intervention in AMI-related cardiogenic shock, the benefit was seen only in the male patients. In DANGER-SHOCK, the relative risk for mortality with a pVAD was 1.01 (0.58–1.79) in women compared to 0.67 (0.47–0.93) for men [58]; in CULPRIT-SHOCK the relative risk for mortality with culprit vs. complete revascularisation in women was 1.02 (0.77–1.35) compared to 0.76 (0.64–0.91) in men [72]. The SHOCK trial (revascularisation vs. medical therapy) was not included in our analysis as sex-specific mortality data was unavailable, but also reported a statistically significant benefit for revascularisation in men but no significant benefit in women with a relative risk > 1 [111].
It is possible that these discrepancies are due to the low enrolment of women in RCTs and hence inadequate statistical power to detect benefit of these interventions in women. However, there could also be factors which cause women to derive less benefit from revascularisation and/or MCS than men. Revascularisation may be more challenging in women for the reasons listed above. Complications of MCS, specifically bleeding and limb ischaemia, occur more frequently in women [112, 113], who are more likely to have smaller vessel size, smaller body surface area, and altered haemocompatibility. These factors may contribute to conscious or unconscious bias against the provision of advanced therapies to women.
There are further potential systemic biases against female patients in acute cardiovascular care. Several guidelines for escalation of therapy in cardiogenic shock use haemodynamic and biochemical thresholds extracted from analysis of databases with predominantly male patients. As demonstrated, women are underrepresented in cardiovascular disease trials [114], the results of which eventually comprise the basis of clinical guidelines including the SCAI classification of CS. The disparity in the outcome between male and female sex has been noted in the SCAI consensus on sex specific considerations in myocardial revascularisation with recommendations to create sex-based algorithms [115]. It may be that, given the results of our study, a similar approach is required to address disparities in evidence and in receipt of treatment, promote awareness of cardiovascular disease in women and to close the “sex gap” in cardiogenic shock [116].
Several factors limit the conclusions we can draw from our meta-analysis. Our inclusion of studies from over a twenty-year period led to a large cohort, however this may limit applicability to current practice particularly as cardiogenic shock definitions and therapeutic strategies have evolved over this period.
Although included studies originated from six continents, the majority of our data is derived from countries with access to advanced resources with established preventive public health policies. Most included studies were conducted in tertiary cardiac centres. There was limited evidence from non-specialised units which limits applicability of our findings to this setting. Most included studies assessed patients with AMI- cardiogenic shock, which is not reflective of the contemporary increasing prevalence of cardiogenic shock due to other causes. There were insufficient data to perform a meta-analysis on HF-cardiogenic shock adjusted mortality. We were unable to access individual patient data for the included studies, and thus were unable to stratify data by age, race, or comorbidities which may have limited the conclusions we can draw regarding causes of the observed differences in women and men.
Our meta-analysis on adjusted mortality is limited by moderate likelihood of publication bias, however, if reported, the missing studies would in fact strengthen the observed effect size. Given the lack of an international consensus definition of cardiogenic shock, inclusion criteria and definition of cardiogenic shock definitions may have differed among included studies. The reliability of our mortality analysis is limited by inconsistent definitions of mortality used by included studies. Our mortality endpoint comprises a combination of in-hospital and 30-day mortality. Furthermore, our meta-analysis does not provide information about long-term morbidity and mortality or other patient-centred outcomes.
This systematic review and meta-analysis found increased in-hospital mortality and lower temporary MCS use in cardiogenic shock amongst female patients when compared to male patients. While this may be due to women presenting later in the disease course and a higher comorbidity burden, we cannot exclude the effect of implicit clinician bias. Further research is required to address the causes of this disparity and on how outcomes can be improved to ensure equitable management and access to therapies for women.
The study was conceptualised by A.W, A.P., T.F., N.H., A.K. The full search strategy was developed in conjunction with A.W. and A.L. Literature was screened by T.F., N.H. and A.K. Arbitration of discrepancies and full-text review was undertaken by A.W. Risk of Bias was assessed by T.F., N.H., and A.K with arbitration by A.W. Data was collected and analysed by A.W. Manuscript was written, drafted and reviewed by T.F., N.K., A.K., A.P., K.R, A.W.
Article Processing Charges for Open Access Publication are covered from Alastair Proudfoot’s funding from Medical Research Council (MR/W03011X/1). Dr Alastair Proudfoot also receives funding from Barts Charity. Krishnaraj Rathod receives funding from the National Institute for Health and Care Research. The rest of the authors do not declare any source of funding.
The datasets generated are publicly available in our Supplementary Data File.
‘Human Ethics and Consent to Participate declarations: not applicable’. Study pre-registered on PROSPERO (CRD42022380480).
All authors have approved of and have consented to submit the final version of this manuscript to this journal.
The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Thomas Fisher, Nicole Hill and Antonis Kalakoutas are joint first authors.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
The datasets generated are publicly available in our Supplementary Data File.
Articles from Critical Care are provided here courtesy of BMC

==================================================

Title: Development and external validation of a dynamic risk score for early prediction of cardiogenic shock in cardiac intensive care units using machine learning
Authors: Yindalon Aphinyanaphongs, Rajesh Ranganath, James Horowitz, Glenn I Fishman, Tania Ahuja, Cindy Tsui, John Medamana, Vuthy Nguy, Judith Hochman, Nathaniel R Smilowitz, Samuel D Maidman, Albert Lui, Yuxuan Hu, Samuel Bernard, Mukund Sudarshan, Stuart Katz, Neil Jethani, Nicholas Kiefer, Aahlad Puli, Andrea Tinsay, Mark Goldstein
Organizations: 
1
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA, 
2
NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, USA, 
3
Courant Institute of Mathematics, New York University, New York, USA, 
4
Courant Institute of Mathematics, New York University, New York, USA, 
5
Department of Medicine, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA, 
6
Department of Medicine, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA, 
7
Department of Medicine, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA, 
8
Department of Medicine, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA, 
9
NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, USA, 
11
Courant Institute of Mathematics, New York University, New York, USA, 
12
Department of Population Health, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA, 
13
Department of Population Health, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA, 
14
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA, 
15
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA, 
16
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA, 
17
Department of Pharmacy, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA, 
18
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA, 
19
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA, 
20
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA, 
21
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA
Text:
Myocardial infarction and heart failure are major cardiovascular diseases that affect millions of people in the USA with morbidity and mortality being highest among patients who develop cardiogenic shock. Early recognition of cardiogenic shock allows prompt implementation of treatment measures. Our objective is to develop a new dynamic risk score, called CShock, to improve early detection of cardiogenic shock in the cardiac intensive care unit (ICU).
We developed and externally validated a deep learning-based risk stratification tool, called CShock, for patients admitted into the cardiac ICU with acute decompensated heart failure and/or myocardial infarction to predict the onset of cardiogenic shock. We prepared a cardiac ICU dataset using the Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care-III database by annotating with physician-adjudicated outcomes. This dataset which consisted of 1500 patients with 204 having cardiogenic/mixed shock was then used to train CShock. The features used to train the model for CShock included patient demographics, cardiac ICU admission diagnoses, routinely measured laboratory values and vital signs, and relevant features manually extracted from echocardiogram and left heart catheterization reports. We externally validated the risk model on the New York University (NYU) Langone Health cardiac ICU database which was also annotated with physician-adjudicated outcomes. The external validation cohort consisted of 131 patients with 25 patients experiencing cardiogenic/mixed shock. CShock achieved an area under the receiver operator characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.821 (95% CI 0.792–0.850). CShock was externally validated in the more contemporary NYU cohort and achieved an AUROC of 0.800 (95% CI 0.717–0.884), demonstrating its generalizability in other cardiac ICUs. Having an elevated heart rate is most predictive of cardiogenic shock development based on Shapley values. The other top 10 predictors are having an admission diagnosis of myocardial infarction with ST-segment elevation, having an admission diagnosis of acute decompensated heart failure, Braden Scale, Glasgow Coma Scale, blood urea nitrogen, systolic blood pressure, serum chloride, serum sodium, and arterial blood pH.
The novel CShock score has the potential to provide automated detection and early warning for cardiogenic shock and improve the outcomes for millions of patients who suffer from myocardial infarction and heart failure.
Keywords: Heart failure, Myocardial infarction, Data science, Machine learning, Cardiac critical care

Cardiogenic shock is a life-threatening condition that is characterized by reduced cardiac output in the presence of adequate intravascular volume, resulting in tissue hypoxia. Myocardial infarctions1,2 and acute decompensated heart failure3 are the two most common aetiologies for cardiogenic shock.4 Mortality for cardiogenic shock remains high (30–50%).1,4,5 Early identification of cardiogenic shock can facilitate interventions that may mitigate the consequences of prolonged end-organ insult,6,7 such as rapid employment of haemodynamic support with pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic agents, engagement of a dedicated shock team, and prompt transfer of patients at lower-acuity hospitals to a tertiary high-volume shock hub.1 In the setting of acute myocardial infarction, early recognition of patients at high risk for cardiogenic shock allows providers to proceed with urgent revascularization of the infarct-related coronary artery.5 Therefore, timely recognition of patients at high risk for cardiogenic shock is crucial for improving the care of patients and their outcomes.
Despite the potential benefits, early identification of cardiogenic shock has been challenging. Intensive care unit (ICU) providers are presented with tremendous amounts of data generated from multiple sources including laboratory measurements, vital signs, haemodynamics, and cardiac function studies. The limited ability of human providers to process, interpret, and act upon all the data stored in the electronic health record (EHR) in a timely fashion can lead to poor patient outcomes. Moreover, it is difficult to provide around-the-clock monitoring and risk assessment of cardiac ICU patients by human caregivers, especially in settings with low provider-to-patient ratios.
Furthermore, there lacks an effective risk stratification tool for the development of cardiogenic shock. Current risk stratification strategies such as the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Intervention classification schema8,9 lack specific quantitative criteria, making it challenging to apply clinically. Well-established scores such as CardShock,10 intraaortic balloon pump (IABP)-shock II,11 and Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II12 were developed to predict outcomes such as in-hospital or 30-day mortality rather than the development of cardiogenic shock. The Observatoire Régional Breton sur l'Infarctus (ORBI) risk score13 was developed for predicting cardiogenic shock and is transparent and can be applied at the bedside. However, the study cohort for the ORBI risk score was myocardial infarction with ST-elevation (STEMI) patients only.
Early identification and treatment of cardiogenic shock could lead to better outcomes, shorter cardiac ICU length of stay, and fewer complications in cardiac ICUs.6 To improve risk stratification of cardiac critical care patients and provide early warning of cardiogenic shock for patients admitted into cardiac ICU with (i) acute decompensated heart failure and/or (ii) STEMI or myocardial infarction without ST-elevation (NSTEMI), we develop a new dynamic risk score, called CShock, by training a machine learning model with a novel loss function designed specifically for risk scoring. Our goal is to predict the development of late cardiogenic shock after cardiac ICU admission for at-risk patients. We prepared a cardiac ICU dataset using Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care-III (MIMIC-III) database14 by annotating with physician-adjudicated outcomes and relevant features manually extracted from echocardiogram and catheterization reports. This dataset was then used to train CShock. We externally validated the risk model on the New York University (NYU) Langone Health cardiac ICU database which was also annotated with physician-adjudicated outcomes.
We used a publicly available critical care database MIMIC-III,14 which has 8188 admissions involving at least one cardiac ICU stay during the hospitalization. The inclusion criterion for chart review was that patients needed to have a possible diagnosis of acute decompensated heart failure and/or myocardial infarction with or without ST-elevation. The exclusion criteria were patients with age <18 years old or >89 years old, total hospital stay <24 h, surgery ICU admission prior to cardiac ICU admission during the same hospitalization, and shock on arrival to cardiac ICU (details in Supplementary material online, Methods, section Chart review). The discharge summary and echocardiogram reports of the admissions that were eligible for chart review were subsequently split among four physicians to review, which provided information regarding additional exclusion criteria, admission diagnoses, outcomes (no shock vs. non-cardiogenic shock only vs. cardiogenic shock/mixed shock), left heart catheterization, and echocardiogram data (details in Supplementary material online, Methods, section Chart review). Patients who developed shock within 4 h of cardiac ICU admission were excluded due to the assumption that the patient was likely in a peri-shock state at the time of admission. Patients’ outcomes were retrospectively adjudicated from chart review. Time of shock onset was determined as the earliest time after cardiac ICU admission when (i) systolic blood pressure was <90mmHg for at least 30 min and there was evidence of systemic hypoperfusion or (ii) pharmacologic agents/mechanical circulatory support was initiated to maintain systolic blood pressure >90mmHg,7 consistent with the clinical criteria used in prior landmark trials on cardiogenic shock.5,15 If there was a discrepancy between physician-adjudicated outcomes and objective data, i.e. physician-adjudicated outcome revealed no shock but there was shock based on structured data, a second physician reviewed both the discharge summary and the structured data to reconcile the discrepancy (details in Supplementary material online, Methods, section Chart review). Primary physician assessment of outcomes from discharge summary was blinded to the predictors. The validation of the primary assessment and the time of the event was done in an unblinded manner with respect to blood pressure, lactate, creatinine, and urine output.
We developed CShock to determine the risk a patient has for developing cardiogenic shock after admission to the cardiac ICU. CShock is updated every hour after cardiac ICU admission. A patient was considered positive if the patient developed cardiogenic or mixed shock during their cardiac ICU stay; the patients who developed non-cardiogenic shock only or no shock in the study cohort were treated as negative cases. The features used to train the model for CShock included patient demographics, cardiac ICU admission diagnoses, routinely measured laboratory values and vital signs, and relevant features manually extracted from echocardiogram and left heart catheterization reports (see Supplementary material online, Methods, List of Features in the models). The physiological time series of the time-varying features from cardiac ICU admission to event (discharge if no shock; shock onset otherwise) were inputted into the CShock model. The model that underlies CShock was based on a dilated causal convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture, often used for time series modelling (See Supplementary material online, Methods, Model development for more details on model architecture).
The study cohort was split 50, 25, and 25% into training, validation, and testing in a four-fold cross-validation. Each fold had the same proportion of patients who developed cardiogenic shock vs. did not develop cardiogenic shock. To improve performance, the model was pretrained in an auxiliary task of predicting in-hospital mortality for ICU patients in MIMIC-III database. The receiving operator characteristic (ROC) curve and its corresponding area under the curve (AUC) were obtained by varying the alarm threshold that determined which patients were identified by the model as at risk for cardiogenic shock. We considered a comparison of CShock against the ORBI risk score13 but could not accurately calculate the ORBI risk score, as many of the variables involved in the calculation of the ORBI score were not available such as history of previous stroke/transient ischemic attack (TIA), post-primary percutaneous coronary intervention (pPCI) thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) flow <3, Killip class, and first medical contact-to-pPCI delay >90 min. In addition, the ORBI risk score was developed for patients admitted for STEMI only, whereas our cohort also included patients admitted for acute decompensated heart failure and NSTEMI. We followed TRIPOD (Transparent reporting of a multivariable prediction model for individual prognosis or diagnosis)16 in reporting the results (see Supplementary material online, Appendix for details).
The model was externally validated using a dataset that comprised patients admitted to the cardiac ICU at NYU Langone Health who met the same inclusion and exclusion criteria as the study cohort. Patients’ outcomes in the external validation cohort were retrospectively adjudicated by a physician. The NYU Langone Health patient cohort is more contemporary than the MIMIC-III cohort (MIMIC-III data were between 2001 and 2012 and NYU data were between 2018 and 2022). A subset of the features in the full model were available for external validation. We trained the model on the MIMIC-III cohort using the subset of features. The time-dependent variables also had missing indicators that took a value of 1 if the corresponding feature value was missing at each unique hour after cardiac ICU admission; 0 otherwise. Missing values were forward filled with the last known values and if the last known values were not available, imputed using population mean, as they were done for the development dataset. Primary physician assessment of outcomes from discharge summary was blinded to the predictors. The validation of the primary assessment and the time of the event was done in an unblinded manner with respect to blood pressure, lactate, creatinine, and urine output. The input features of the external validation cohort were fed into the portable model to produce the time-varying CShock risk score for cardiogenic shock. Receiving operator characteristic curve and its corresponding AUC were obtained by varying the alarm threshold that determined which patients were identified by the model as at risk for cardiogenic shock.
We used Shapley values17 to provide explanations for how each feature influenced predictions. We employed FastSHAP,18 an efficient algorithm for calculating Shapley values.17 The Shapley values were based on a FastSHAP’s surrogate model that was trained to produce CShock risk scores given different feature subsets by masked prediction19,20 rather than model the covariates21 (see Supplementary material online, Methods for more details on model interpretation). Shapley values were determined for the features in the portable model using the training dataset.
In total, 3220 admissions met the inclusion and exclusion criteria for chart review (Figure 1). After applying the additional criteria (details in Supplementary material online, Methods, section Study cohort) obtained from chart review, the final study cohort comprised 1500 patients (Figure 1), comparable in size to the cohorts used to derive other risk scores for cardiogenic shock.11,22 A total of 1264 patients had no shock event before cardiac ICU discharge; 204 had cardiogenic/mixed shock; and 32 had non-cardiogenic shock only (Figure 1). The 204 patients who developed cardiogenic/mixed shock were considered positive; 1296 patients who developed non-cardiogenic shock only or no shock in the study cohort were treated as negative cases. The causes of non-cardiogenic shock were found to be septic or haemorrhagic shock during chart review. The average age of the study cohort in MIMIC-III was 68.1 ± 13.5. There were 918 male and 582 female patients in the MIMIC-III study cohort. Race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status were not provided for the study cohort. Baseline characteristics of the study cohort are shown in Table 1.

Study cohort. *The admissions that met the following criteria were excluded: development of acute respiratory distress syndrome, massive pulmonary embolism, cardiac tamponade and mechanical complications of myocardial infarction, urgent coronary artery bypass surgery, cardiac surgery in the 7 days prior to first cardiac intensive care unit admission, and cardiac arrest in the 7 days prior to first cardiac intensive care unit admission and admission to cardiac intensive care unit for diagnosis other than myocardial infarction with ST-elevation/myocardial infarction without ST-elevation/ADHF. Patients who developed shock within 4 h of cardiac intensive care unit admission were also excluded due to the assumption that the patient was likely in a peri-shock state at the time of admission.
Baseline characteristics of the study cohort
There were 194 input variables, including 182 time-varying (physiological) and 12 static (e.g. demographic) features. The left panel of Figure 2 demonstrates the physiological time series of five example features that were entered into the dilated CNN-based model, which then outputted the CShock score as shown by the blue lines in the right panel. The dashed blue line is the CShock score for a patient who develops no shock and gets discharged from the cardiac ICU at Hour 16; the solid blue line shows the CShock score for a patient who goes into mixed cardiogenic/non-cardiogenic shock at Hour 11. Cardiogenic shock detection occurs if a patient’s CShock score exceeds the alarm threshold value.

The physiological time series of five example features from cardiac intensive care unit admission to event (discharge if no shock; shock onset otherwise) are shown for a patient developing mixed cardiogenic/non-cardiogenic shock (left panel). Features displayed are the Glasgow Coma Scale (a score for coma severity, see Supplementary material online, Methods, List of Features in the models for the three components of the score), creatinine, lactate, heart rate, and systolic blood pressure without support. The physiological time series were fed into the convolutional neural network-based model, which outputted CShock scores. CShock scores (in the right panel) were calculated for each hour from cardiac intensive care unit admission until the event. Two patients’ CShock scores are shown here: one patient develops no shock and gets discharged from cardiac intensive care unit at Hour 16 (dashed line); the other patient goes into mixed shock at Hour 11 (solid line). Cardiogenic shock detection occurs if a patient’s CShock score exceeds the alarm threshold value. The horizontal line indicates the detection threshold corresponding to a sensitivity of 0.8.
The CShock score was able to achieve an area under the receiver operator characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.821 (95% CI 0.792–0.850) (Figure 3). Table 2A shows positive predictive value (PPV)/negative predictive value (NPV), sensitivity/specificity, overall accuracy of the model, and how early the model can predict cardiogenic shock at different thresholds. Each row in the table corresponds to the CShock model having a PPV of one-fourth, one-third, and 0.4.

Cross-validated receiving operator characteristic for predicting cardiogenic shock using the developed CShock score with the Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care-III dataset.
(A) Positive predictive value/negative predictive value, sensitivity/specificity, and overall accuracy of the model at different thresholds. Each row in the table corresponds to the CShock model having a positive predictive value of one-fourth, one-third, and 0.4. (B) Area under the receiver operator characteristic curve and area under precision recall curve (AUPRC) of the CShock model (in comparison, the prevalence of cardiogenic shock/mixed shock in the study cohort was 13.6%)
We performed subgroup analysis based on age, sex, and aetiology (Table 3). The model performed better for the younger group than the older group. We also found that the model performed better for male patients [0.844 (95% CI 0.807–0.881)] compared with female patients [0.781 (95% CI 0.733–0.828)]. The model performed best in the STEMI subgroup compared with NSTEMI and acute decompensated heart failure subgroups. The NSTEMI and acute decompensated heart failure subgroups showed weaker prediction compared with the entire study cohort. The STEMI subgroup had better performance than the entire study cohort.
Area under the receiver operator characteristic curve, number of patients, and number of patients with cardiogenic/mixed shock (percentage) for each age group, sex, and aetiology
The model was externally validated using a dataset that comprised all patients admitted to the cardiac ICU at NYU Langone Health who met the same inclusion and exclusion criteria as the study cohort (see Supplementary material online, Figure S1). The external validation cohort consisted of 131 patients with 25 patients experiencing cardiogenic/mixed shock. The average age of the external validation cohort was 64.5 ± 14.9. There were 85 male and 46 female patients. Race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status were not provided for the external validation cohort. Of the 182 time-varying input features in the original model, 58 input features are routinely measured in the EHR at NYU Langone Health. Therefore, we developed the portable model by training with 70 input features (58 were time-varying and 12 were static) using the MIMIC-III database (list of features is available in the Supplementary material online, Methods, List of Features in the models, denoted as included in the portable model). The portable model was able to achieve similar AUROC at 0.806 (95% CI 0.777–0.835) on the study cohort. It was then externally validated using the NYU Langone Health cardiac ICU dataset and obtained an AUROC of 0.800 (95% CI 0.717–0.884).


Figure 4A
 presents the 10 most important features, i.e. with the largest Shapley values; each dot represents the feature values averaged over time of an individual patient from the training dataset with a higher value being more red and a lower value being more blue. Positive and negative Shapley values are associated with an increase or decrease in the CShock score, i.e. risk of cardiogenic shock development, respectively. For instance, heart rate is the most predictive feature of cardiogenic shock development and having an elevated heart rate is associated with an increased risk of cardiogenic shock development. Figure 4B shows how the AUROC changes as more features are added in descending order of importance into the FastSHAP surrogate model. AUROC improved as more features were included in the model and the best AUROCs were similar to that obtained using the portable model. With only the 10 most important features (as displayed in Figure 4A), the FastSHAP surrogate model was able to achieve AUROC (vertical line in Figure 4B) similar to that when more features were included. We used the top 10 variables in Figure 4A at the time of cardiac ICU admission to predict cardiogenic shock with a logistic regression model and found the AUROC of the reduced model to be 0.758 (95% CI 0.725–0.792), which is lower than the AUROC for the full (0.821, 95% CI 0.792–0.850) and portable (0.806, 95% CI 0.777–0.835) models. We reported the averaged beta coefficients and odds ratio of the reduced model in Table 4.

(A) The 10 most important features based on Shapley values in descending order of importance (1 heart rate, 2 having an admission diagnosis of myocardial infarction with ST-elevation, 3 having an admission diagnosis of acute decompensated heart failure, 4 Braden Scale, 5 Glasgow Coma Scale, 6 blood urea nitrogen, 7 systolic blood pressure, 8 serum chloride, 9 serum sodium, 10 arterial blood pH). Each dot represents the feature values averaged over time of an individual patient from the training dataset with a higher value being more red and a lower value being more blue. Positive and negative Shapley values are associated with an increase or decrease in the risk of cardiogenic shock development, respectively. (B) Area under the receiver operator characteristic curve obtained with an increasing number of features included in the FastSHAP surrogate model using the evaluation dataset. Vertical line indicates the area under the receiver operator characteristic curve when only the 10 most important features (as displayed in Figure 4A) were included in the FastSHAP surrogate model that was trained to predict on subsets of features.
Beta coefficients averaged across folds and the corresponding odds ratio for the reduced model
Myocardial infarction and heart failure affect nine and six million people in the US, respectively.23 Cardiogenic shock is a common complication of myocardial infarction and heart failure and its occurrence is associated with substantial health and economic costs.1 Early recognition of cardiogenic shock is of paramount importance as it facilitates timely treatments that could potentially prevent the vicious spiral of cardiogenic shock and reduce the health and financial burden. However, early identification of cardiogenic shock has remained challenging.6 We have demonstrated that the CShock score can predict cardiogenic shock with excellent AUROC. The early warning system was tested in an independent and more contemporary patient cohort from a different hospital and showed comparable performance as in the development data.
At several different PPVs, CShock was able to achieve good NPV (>0.92) and predict cardiogenic shock, on average, >37 h ahead of the shock event. With increasing PPV, sensitivity decreased and specificity increased as expected. ORBI is an easy-to-use score with excellent performance for its study cohorts.13 Unfortunately, some variables in the ORBI score calculation were not available for our study cohort such as history of previous stroke/TIA, post-pPCI TIMI flow <3, Killip class, and first medical contact-to-pPCI delay >90 min. Some variables such as post-pPCI TIMI flow <3 and first medical contact-to-pPCI delay >90 min are not relevant for acute decompensated heart failure patients subgroup in our study cohort, as ORBI was developed for STEMI patients only and our study cohort also had NSTEMI and acute decompensated heart failure patients.
The CShock risk score performed better for the younger subgroup compared with the older subgroup. This could be due to the fact that the elderly tend to have more comorbidities that were embedded only in the unstructured data of the EHR (e.g. clinical notes) and thus unaccounted for in the model. The CShock risk score also performed better for the male cohort compared with the female cohort. This was possibly a result of the study cohort having more male patients (918) as compared with female patients (582) and thus the model was better trained for the male cohort. The CShock risk score performed best for the STEMI cohort followed by the NSTEMI and acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF) subgroups, which is inversely associated with the prevalence of cardiogenic shock in the three subgroups.
The portable model is readily deployable. The portable model with 70 features that are routinely captured in the EHR database at NYU Langone Health achieved an AUROC of 0.806 (95% CI 0.777–0.835). This model could be easily implemented at other facilities with modern EHR systems, as most of the variables in the portable model are available in modern EHR systems. Using the portable model instead of the full model for EHR deployment can make implementation easier. It is interesting to note that the portable model performed on par with the full model despite having fewer features. This could be because (i) it is difficult to manually extract features from unstructured data (e.g. echocardiogram and catheterization data) and the lack of data can jeopardize the performance of the machine learning model; it is possible if those features were available as structured data, the performance of the full model would be even better. (ii) The structured data captured most of the predictive information that would be embedded in unstructured data; incorporating unstructured data will not improve the performance of the machine learning model beyond what has been achieved with structured data only. We were also able to achieve lower but still predictive AUROC using the top 10 variables in Figure 4A at the time of cardiac ICU admission to predict cardiogenic shock in a logistic regression model; this reduced model can be a good point-of-care tool at the time of admission.
Previous machine learning studies in broader medicine have relied on International Classification of Diseases (ICD) codes and natural language processing of clinical notes24 to determine outcomes such as sepsis and septic shock. These types of approaches for determining outcomes are often inaccurate.25 In contrast, the outcome events for the cardiac ICU patients were carefully adjudicated by physicians in this study. This will allow the CShock score developed by this project to translate more easily into clinical implementation.
We constructed a novel loss function specifically for risk scoring. The dilated causal CNN architecture along with the novel loss function are of broad applicability and can be employed for risk stratification in multiple clinical settings such as sepsis and pulmonary embolism. Pretraining is a relatively new technique for improving the performance of physiological time series. It has been widely used for improving the performance of imaging analysis26 and also for text via large language models.27 Recently, there have been a few studies employing pretraining with labels that are related but not identical to the primary outcome of interest to improve the performance of physiological time series models.28 We therefore employed a similar technique to improve the performance of our model in predicting cardiogenic shock by pretraining our model with a label such as mortality. Cardiogenic shock and mortality share certain physiological characteristics such as deranged metabolism. In this case, we showed that pretraining with an auxiliary task of predicting mortality for ICU patients in the MIMIC-III database improved the AUROC of the cardiogenic shock model from 0.750 (95% CI 0.715–0.786) to 0.821 (95% CI 0.792–0.850). We demonstrated that pretraining with a different cohort and a label that is related but not identical to the primary outcome of interest such as mortality can be a useful strategy to improve physiological time series model performance when there is a limited number of patients who meet all the inclusion and exclusion criteria of the study.
Shapley values are widely used to explain deep learning models and we used Shapley values to explain our model. We implemented a state-of-the-art algorithm for computing Shapley values18 to reduce the amount of time it would take to calculate Shapley values relative to the traditional way that relies on optimizing the loss given by the least squares characterization for each new data point.17 This model interpretation analysis using Shapley values indicated that an admission diagnosis of STEMI is associated with a lower risk of development of cardiogenic shock, whereas having an admission diagnosis of acute decompensated heart failure is associated with a higher risk of development of cardiogenic shock. This likely reflects advancements in acute coronary syndrome (ACS) management strategies over the years, which makes ACS patients less likely to develop cardiogenic shock. It could also relate to the fact that patients who were admitted with STEMI and acute decompensated heart failure have a higher risk of developing cardiogenic shock (12.7% in MIMIC-III study cohort), while patients admitted with STEMI but no acute decompensated heart failure have much lower risk of developing cardiogenic shock (4.5% in MIMIC-III study cohort). Among the 10 most important features, low Braden Scale (a risk score for identifying patients at risk for pressure ulcers,29 see Supplementary material online, Methods, List of Features in the models for the six variables in Braden Scale), Glasgow Coma Scale, systolic blood pressure without support, and serum sodium are predictive of cardiogenic shock development, as expected clinically.9,30,31 Lactate, a commonly used lab measurement to assess for severity of cardiogenic shock, is not among the 10 most important features; conceivably other top features captured most of the predictive information that would be embedded in lactate.
There have been other recent efforts to predict cardiogenic shock with machine learning.32,33 However, they only considered patients who required inotropes/mechanical circulatory support as developing cardiogenic shock and used the time to initiate supportive measures as shock onset, which are not in alignment with the clinical criteria used in previous landmark trials;5,15 the early presentation of cardiogenic shock with low blood pressure and end-organ hypoperfusion would be missed by their algorithms. In addition, both studies lacked external validation to demonstrate generalizability in other populations. 1% of the study cohort developed cardiogenic shock in the study by Rahman et al.,33 which resulted in the best PPV being only 11% (with recall/sensitivity 27%) and would lead to the algorithm sounding many false alarms secondary to extreme class imbalance and missing the majority of cardiogenic shock patients. However, the comparison is limited as their score was developed using data from floors/emergency rooms and thus the population would have a lower prevalence; their reported PPVs of cardiogenic shock would be expected to be lower. Despite these challenges, like developing a dynamic risk score for early prediction of cardiogenic shock in cardiac ICU, developing risk scores for the general floor is an important clinical problem. It can also be interesting to extend the CShock model to non-ICU settings in future studies. The study by Chang et al.32 relied on ICD codes to determine outcomes, which would be inaccurate as discussed above; they excluded mixed cardiogenic/non-cardiogenic shock patients from the study cohort, which could limit the algorithm’s applicability. Lastly, machine learning techniques have been improving for better prediction of cardiogenic shock. The recent publication by Jajcay et al. developed a data processing pipeline for cardiogenic shock prediction using machine learning and achieved good classification performance.34 Their pre-processing pipeline could prove helpful for improving the performance of future machine learning-based risk models for cardiogenic shock including our CShock risk model.
Given the performance of our CShock score, we hypothesize that this CNN-based early warning model can help cardiac ICU teams clinically integrate complex data and more rapidly identify patients at risk for cardiogenic shock. A recent study using the Critical Care Cardiology Trials Network data showed that a multidisciplinary shock team approach improved outcomes in cardiogenic shock6 and this machine learning-based model could build upon this improvement, alerting shock teams to impending cardiogenic shock. Each cardiac ICU team can choose a PPV value that is best for their team in terms of sensitivity so that they can achieve a balance in capturing most of the cardiogenic shock patients but also minimizing alert fatigue. The exact way to implement the algorithm can take on different forms: it can be an alert notifying the team of the possible impending cardiogenic shock; alternatively, the CShock score of the patient developing cardiogenic shock can be displayed. The best way to implement this algorithm will depend on each cardiac ICU team’s preference and requires further studies with principles from human–computer interaction. The CShock model is able to predict cardiogenic shock at least 37 h in advance at several PPV thresholds. It can, therefore, help alert the shock team in advance to give the team ample time to prepare for impending cardiogenic shock. In summary, we demonstrate that the CShock score we developed has the potential to provide automated detection and early warning for cardiogenic shock and improve the outcomes for millions of patients who suffer from myocardial infarction and heart failure.
The major limitation of the study is that the CShock model was developed and externally validated using cardiac ICU data from two academic medical centres in metropolitan areas and that the MIMIC-III database was collected from 2001 to 2012, which is not contemporary. Future studies should be conducted to evaluate the performance of the CShock model in other contemporary cardiac ICU databases of different hospital practices and different patient populations, especially in populations that are different from the typical demographics seen in academic centres in the Northeast USA. In addition, even though we treated the patients who developed non-cardiogenic shock as negative cases in this manuscript, this could present a bias as septicaemia can lead to cardiac suppression. Lastly, the availability of some input features such as pulmonary artery catheter data, lactate, and arterial blood gas data could be that the team is worried of impending shock. Using those features in training the model could introduce a bias to the model.
Yuxuan Hu, 
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.
Albert Lui, 
NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, USA.
Mark Goldstein, 
Courant Institute of Mathematics, New York University, New York, USA.
Mukund Sudarshan, 
Courant Institute of Mathematics, New York University, New York, USA.
Andrea Tinsay, 
Department of Medicine, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA.
Cindy Tsui, 
Department of Medicine, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA.
Samuel D Maidman, 
Department of Medicine, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA.
John Medamana, 
Department of Medicine, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA.
Neil Jethani, 
NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, USA; 
Courant Institute of Mathematics, New York University, New York, USA.
Aahlad Puli, 
Courant Institute of Mathematics, New York University, New York, USA.
Vuthy Nguy, 
Department of Population Health, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA.
Yindalon Aphinyanaphongs, 
Department of Population Health, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA.
Nicholas Kiefer, 
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.
Nathaniel R Smilowitz, 
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.
James Horowitz, 
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.
Tania Ahuja, 
Department of Pharmacy, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA.
Glenn I Fishman, 
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.
Judith Hochman, 
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.
Stuart Katz, 
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.
Samuel Bernard, 
Leon. H. Charney Division of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, 550 1st Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.
Rajesh Ranganath, 
Courant Institute of Mathematics, New York University, New York, USA; 
Department of Population Health, NYU Langone Health, New York, USA; 
Center for Data Science, New York University, New York, USA.

Supplementary material is available at European Heart Journal: Acute Cardiovascular Care online.
Y.H., M.G., and R.R. designed the experiments. Y.H. and A.L. preprocessed and cleaned the MIMIC data. Y.H., A.T., C.T., S.M., and J.M. reviewed the MIMIC charts. V.N., Y.A., N.K., Ja.H., and T.A. selected and provided the NYU clinical data and context. Y.H. preprocessed, cleaned, and chart reviewed the NYU data. Y.H., M.G., and R.R. developed the pipeline for the CShock risk model. Y.H. and M.G. implemented the CShock model. Y.H. implemented pretraining, analysed subgroup performance, and externally validated the model with NYU data. Y.H., M.G., N.J., and R.R. devised and implemented the model interpretation strategy. M.S., A.P., N.S., and S.K. contributed to various analyses of the data. Y.H., A.L., M.G., and R.R. conceived and directed the project. Y.H. and M.G. made the figures. Y.H. and M.G. drafted the manuscript. G.F., Ju.H., S.K., S.B., and R.R. provided critical review.
Y.H. was supported by an National Institute of Health T32 grant (T32HL098129). R.R. was supported by National Institute of Health/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Award R01HL148248, National Science Foundation Award 1922658 NRT-HDR: FUTURE Foundations, Translation, and Responsibility for Data Science, and National Science Foundation CAREER Award 2145542. N.J. was supported by an National Institute of Health T32 grant (T32GM007308). The funder of the study (National Institute of Health and National Science Foundation) had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, writing of the report, or the decision to submit for publication.
The full MIMIC dataset can be downloaded from http://physionet.org. The labels for cardiogenic shock will be made available on request based on the MIMIC policies. The computer code used in this research will be available at www.github.com/yuxuanhu12/cshock under an open-source license.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
The full MIMIC dataset can be downloaded from http://physionet.org. The labels for cardiogenic shock will be made available on request based on the MIMIC policies. The computer code used in this research will be available at www.github.com/yuxuanhu12/cshock under an open-source license.
Articles from European Heart Journal. Acute Cardiovascular Care are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press

==================================================

Title: A Clinical Update on Vasoactive Medication in the Management of Cardiogenic Shock
Authors: William J Nicholson, Saraschandra Vallabhajosyula, Gayathri Gurumurthy, Wissam A Jaber, Aditi Shankar, Lakshmi Sridharan, Divya Gupta
Organizations: 
1Department of Medicine, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital Dallas, Dallas, TX, USA, 
2Jiva Health, Concord, CA, USA, 
3Section of Heart Failure and Cardiac Transplantation, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA, 
3Section of Heart Failure and Cardiac Transplantation, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA, 
4Section of Interventional Cardiology, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA, 
4Section of Interventional Cardiology, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA
Text:
This is a focused review looking at the pharmacological support in cardiogenic shock. There are a plethora of data evaluating vasopressors and inotropes in septic shock, but the data are limited for cardiogenic shock. This review article describes in detail the pathophysiology of cardiogenic shock, the mechanism of action of different vasopressors and inotropes emphasizing their indications and potential side effects. This review article incorporates the currently used specific risk-prediction models in cardiogenic shock as well as integrates data from many trials on the use of vasopressors and inotropes. Lastly, this review seeks to discuss the future direction for vasoactive medications in cardiogenic shock.
Keywords: Cardiogenic shock, acute myocardial infarction, vasopressors, inotropes, mechanical circulatory support
Cardiogenic shock is defined as inadequate tissue hypoperfusion caused due to a primary cardiac dysfunction.1,2 Delayed recognition and treatment of cardiogenic shock leads to rapid deterioration in clinical status with nearly 50% in-hospital mortality in the contemporary era despite advances in medical therapies, specifically prompt mechanical revascularization with thrombolysis, percutaneous coronary intervention, and coronary artery bypass grafting.2-4 The overall incidence of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) with cardiogenic shock is 5% to 10%, with higher rates in ST-segment-elevation MI as compared to non-ST-segment-elevation MI.
5
 The overall incidence of cardiogenic shock in the past 2 decades have remained unchanged. cardiogenic shock is still the commonest cause of mortality in patients admitted to the hospital with AMI.
4
 Studies by Fang et al
6
 and Helgestad et al
7
 have shown a decrease in the incidence of AMI-cardiogenic shock, whereas the studies by Babaev
8
 and Kolte
9
 have reported increased to unchanged incidence of AMI-cardiogenic shock in the past 2 to 3 decades.10,11 Though the in-hospital mortality has improved in recent times,
12
 the long-term mortality remains elevated at nearly 50%.13,14
The clinical criteria for the diagnosis of cardiogenic shock based on the SHOCK (Should We Emergently Revascularize Occluded Coronaries For Cardiogenic Shock) and the IABP-SHOCK II (Intra-aortic Balloon Pump in Cardiogenic Shock II) trials were defined by systolic blood pressure (SBP) <90 mm Hg for >30 minutes, use of mechanical or pharmacologic support to maintain SBP >90 mm Hg, urine output <30 mL/hour, cardiac index (CI) <2.2 L/minute/m2, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) >15 mm Hg and lactate >2 mmol/L.2,4 The 2016 European Society of Cardiology-Heart Failure guidelines include clinical criteria along with hemodynamic criteria in the definition of cardiogenic shock: SBP <90 mm Hg despite appropriate fluid resuscitation with clinical and laboratory evidence of end organ damage.15-17 Clinical criteria were defined as cold extremities, oliguria, altered mental status change, and narrow pulse pressure, and laboratory abnormalities included metabolic acidosis, elevated serum lactate and elevated creatinine.4,18
The commonest etiology of cardiogenic shock is left ventricular (LV) failure in the setting of AMI. Cardiogenic shock is seen more commonly with anterior AMI
19
 when compared to inferior AMI.3,20 Acute complications of AMI such as ventricular septal rupture,
21
 LV free wall rupture, acute mitral regurgitation, and cardiac tamponade account for the other ischemic etiologies of cardiogenic shock.
3
 Other non-ischemic etiologies
22
 include valvular regurgitation and stenosis, aortic dissection, primary LV dysfunction like acute decompensated heart failure, post cardiotomy syndromes,
23
 takotsubo cardiomyopathy,24,25 myocarditis, infiltrative disorders
26
 (like sarcoidosis, amyloidosis, hemochromatosis), acute tachyarrhythmia and bradyarrhythmia,
27
 infective endocarditis, pericarditis and constrictive pericarditis.
28
 Rare causes include severe hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, peri, and post-partum cardiomyopathy.
29
 Pharmacological agents like beta blockers when used in early AMI-cardiogenic shock were associated with higher incidence of cardiogenic shock in the COMMIT (Clopidogrel and Metoprolol in Myocardial Infarction) trial.
30
 Overdose with flecainide,
31
 calcium channel blockers
32
 and digoxin have been implicated in cardiogenic shock in some case reports.33,34
Patients with cardiogenic shock have a varying continuum of presentation ranging from isolated myocardial dysfunction to multiorgan dysfunction with severe hemodynamic compromise to cardiac arrest.
35
 The prognosis of cardiogenic shock is also variable in patients with different etiologies, severity, and comorbid condition.35,36 The Society for Angiography and Cardiovascular Interventions (SCAI) has recently proposed a classification system for cardiogenic shock encompassing clinical, biochemical, and hemodynamic parameters to guide treatment and classify outcomes. The 5 stages of cardiogenic shock are (Figure 1):

The society for angiography and cardiovascular interventions (SCAI) staging of cardiogenic shock.
Adapted with permission from Baran et al.
35

Abbreviations: CPR, cardiopulmonary resuscitation; CVP, central venous pressure; ECMO, extra corporeal membrane oxygenation; JVP, jugular venous pulsations; LFTs, liver function test; MAP, mean arterial blood pressure; PA Sat, pulmonary artery saturation; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; PEA, pulseless electrical activity; SBP, systolic blood pressure.
Stage A: Patients “at risk” of developing cardiogenic shock and include patients with an acute MI, previous or subacute MI and decompensated heart failure. Cardiovascular examination is normal with adequate perfusion status. Renal function and lactate are also within normal limits. Hemodynamic parameters reflecting normotension, CI >2.5 L/minute/m2, central venous pressure <10 mm Hg and pulmonary artery saturation >65%.
Stage B: Beginning of cardiogenic shock/compensated cardiogenic shock; patient with clinical evidence of tachycardia and hypotension but without hypoperfusion. Cardiovascular examination with elevated jugular venous pressure, rales in the lung fields but with normal perfusion. Evidence of elevated BNP and mild renal impairment on labs. Hemodynamics with SBP <90 mm Hg or mean arterial pressure (MAP) <60 or >30 mm Hg drop from baseline. Pulse >100 bpm, CI > 2.2 L/minute/m2, pulmonary artery saturation >65%.
Stage C: Classic cardiogenic shock; Patient with hypoperfusion, presenting as relative hypoperfusion requiring pharmacological or mechanical support beyond volume resuscitation to restore perfusion. Physical examination indicative of multiorgan dysfunction and hypoperfusion—volume overload, respiratory distress with extensive rales (Killip class 3/4) requiring positive pressure or mechanical ventilation, cold clammy extremities, alteration of mental status, urine output <30 mL/hour. Biochemical markers with elevated lactate, doubling of creatinine or >50% drop in eGFR and elevated BNP. Hemodynamics with SBP <90 mm Hg, MAP <60 mm Hg or >30 mm Hg drop from baseline and with drugs/devices to maintain SBP above these targets. CI < 2.2 L/minute/m2, PCWP > 15 mm Hg, pulmonary artery pulsatility index
37
 <1.85 and cardiac power output ⩽0.6 W.
Stage D: Deteriorating/doom; Patient with clinical and hemodynamic deterioration despite intensive initial resuscitation for >30 minutes with failure to respond, requiring further escalation of therapy. Clinical exam with any stage C features. Labs indicating deterioration from stage C. Hemodynamics with parameters in stage C and requiring multiple vasopressors or addition of mechanical circulatory support devices to maintain perfusion.
Stage E: Extremis; Patient with circulatory collapse in refractory cardiac arrest with ongoing cardiopulmonary resuscitation
38
 and/or supported by extra corporeal membrane oxygenation
39
 and multiple simultaneous interventions. Physical exam with pulselessness, cardiac collapse, mechanical ventilation or use of defibrillator. Biochemical abnormalities with pH <7.2, lactate ⩾ 5, critically deteriorating biomarkers. Hemodynamics indicating no SBP without resuscitation, pulseless electrical activity or refractory ventricular tachycardia ventricular fibrillation and hypotension without mechanical support.
40

In the staging of CS by SCAI, vasoactive medications have been treated as a binary factor, but cumulative totals have not been considered.35,41 The outcomes of use of vasopressors and inotropes in different stages of CS has not been studied in randomized control trials. Several observational studies performed to validate the SCAI CS staging and to predict the mortality in various stages have demonstrated the use of vasoactive medications in different CS stages and the mortality outcomes. A study by Thayer et al,
42
 showed that, out of the 1414 study participants in various stages of CS, the number and the requirements of vasoactive medications steadily increased with deteriorating SCAI CS stages (100% use of 2+ vasoactive medications in SCAI Stage E vs 57.8% use of 2+ vasoactive medications in SCAI Stage D CS). Another study by Jentzer et al
43
 with a study population of 10,004 patients demonstrated increasing number of vasoactive agents use and earlier initiation of vasoactive agents in Stage D and E compared to earlier SCAI stages of shock (0.4 ± 0.6 and 34% in Stage D vs 1.4 ± 1.0 and 85% in Stage E). Higher stages of CS had aggressive use of vasoactive medications and higher mortality compared to lower stages. These studies, evaluate vasopressors and inotropes as a relative number of each medication. Prior work from the septic shock literature has shown that cumulative vasoactive medication measurements have significant mortality prediction41,44,45. However, the influence of cumulative vasoactive medication measurements and the influence of these medications on the SCAI Shock staging remains to be studied.
The pathophysiology of cardiogenic shock is complex and is characterized by profound depression of myocardial contractility resulting in a downward spiral in which progressive myocardial dysfunction leads to decreased stroke volume, cardiac output (CO) and low MAP, which reduces the myocardial perfusion.
46
 This constitutes a vicious cycle which exacerbates ischemia, and further depress the myocardial function, stroke volume, and systemic perfusion.1,2 In cardiogenic shock, sympathetic stimulation occurs as a compensatory mechanism that increases CO by increasing the heart rate (HR) and contractility, at the cost of increased myocardial oxygen demand.
46
 Compensatory peripheral vasoconstriction increases MAP at the cost of increased myocardial afterload and cause further worsening of myocardial function. The reduction in CI leads to severe tissue hypoperfusion, can worsen the ischemia and may finally result in refractory shock and subsequent death.46,47 As shock progresses, there is prolonged cellular hypoxia leading to depletion of adenosine triphosphate and intracellular energy reserves. This causes the active energy-dependent ion transport pumps to fail, eventually causing the myocardial cells to swell by osmosis due to the build-up of intracellular sodium, calcium, and hydrogen. These changes in membrane potential can lead to apoptosis of the cells through the activation of caspases and eventual cell death.
48
 Alternatively, cardiac injury triggers systemic inflammation which can induce pathological vasodilation. Inducible nitric oxide synthase after exposure to inflammatory mediators produce high nitric oxide levels, along with its derivative, peroxynitrite which are cardiotoxic.
49
 Systemic vasodilation is also caused by other inflammatory mediators like interleukins and tumor necrosis factor and have been associated with mortality in cardiogenic shock.1,2 Vasopressors and inotropes are a group of drugs that create vasoconstriction or increase cardiac contractility in patients with cardiogenic shock. While vasopressors increase vasoconstriction leading to increased systemic vascular resistance (SVR), inotropes increase cardiac contractility and improve CO. These drugs work synergistically in maintaining MAP and organ perfusion summarized as MAP = CO × SVR
46
 (Figure 2).

Vascular response to vasopressors and inotropic medications.
Adapted with permission from Jentzer et al. (2015).
49

Abbreviations: HD, high dose; LD, low dose.
Right ventricular (RV) failure occurs in the setting of diminished myocardial systolic and diastolic pressures. This leads to inadequate forward flow in the RV which contributes to decreased perfusion and increased venous pressures.
13
 Due to the low-pressure circuit and smaller myocardial mass, the RV is prone to early dilatation as compared to the LV further compromising venous return and LV preload. Additionally, bowing of the interventricular septum into the LV further diminishing filling and stroke volume exacerbating the perfusion deficits.
50
 A full discussion of the RV pathology is beyond the scope of the current review and we direct the readers to excellent prior reviews.14,46,47,50
The incidence and mortality of cardiogenic shock has remained unchanged in the last two decades at greater than 50% despite interventional and therapeutic advances.4,51 Although early revascularization (percutaneous coronary intervention/coronary artery bypass grafting) remains the only treatment modality with proven mortality benefits in the long term,3,52,53 cardiogenic shock is still the leading cause of death in hospitalized patients with AMI-cardiogenic shock.4,54 Diversity of the etiopathology, wide clinical spectrum of cardiogenic shock has led to the incongruity in standardizing diagnosis and variations in management strategies.
55
 Hence a multidisciplinary shock team approach was conceptualized55-57 which has shown mortality benefit in cardiogenic shock. The multidisciplinary team approach involves rapid identification of shock state depending on the SHOCK, IABP SHOCK II or European Society of Cardiology 2015 definitions, activation of the multidisciplinary shock team involving interventional cardiologist, cardiothoracic surgeons, heart failure specialists and intensivists.58,59 This is followed by early invasive hemodynamic monitoring with optimizing medical therapy, early mechanical circulatory device support of the left or right ventricle and cardiac recovery.
56
 Although the isolated use of mechanical circulatory support devices for cardiogenic shock was not associated with improved mortality outcomes, early use in the shock team approach was associated with improved mortality benefit.56,57 Initial medical management of cardiogenic shock along with invasive hemodynamic management to achieve adequate tissue perfusion,
60
 maintenance of euvolemia and prevention of multiorgan dysfunction is recommended.
Vasopressors are used in almost 90% of cardiogenic shock patients and form a class IIc and level C evidence of United States and European Society of Cardiology guidelines.1,61,62 To achieve increased cardiac performance both RV and LV function need augmentation.
50
 This involves optimizing preload and decreasing cardiac afterload while achieving optimal contractility for the diseased ventricle.
48
 Inotropic agents are indicated in patients with tissue hypoperfusion despite adequate volume resuscitation.
63
 Cardiogenic shock is also associated with decreased vascular resistance due to various proinflammatory pathways which contributes to the hypotension.63-65 Vasopressors are used to maintain MAP and tissue perfusion pressures with refractory hypotension. Treatment of cardiogenic shock using pharmacologic agents must optimally balance achieving the best tissue perfusion without significantly increasing cardiac work.1,62,63 Hence the pharmacologic therapy should be used for the shortest duration and with the lowest possible dose.
64

Inotropes are a group of medicines that alter the cardiac contractility of the heart muscle and increase the force of myocardial contraction. Inotropes can be broadly divided into 3 groups: adrenergic agonists, phosphodiesterase III inhibitors, and calcium sensitizers.62,66 The adrenergic agonists exert their positive inotropic effects by acting on beta-adrenergic receptors. They increase the HR, stroke volume and the CO.
67
 The adrenergic agonists, dobutamine, dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine, can be classified further based on their effects on systemic vascular resistance (inopressors or inodilators). Milrinone and dobutamine are the only 2 inodilators approved in the United States.
66

Dopamine exerts its effects on cardiovascular system via 4 receptors: dopaminergic type 1 and 2 and adrenergic alpha 1 and beta 1 receptors. At lower doses (<2.5 μg/kg/minute), it causes vasodilation of coronary, renal and splanchnic vessels. At intermediate doses of 3 to 5 μg/kg/minute, it causes significant inotropic and chronotropic effects via beta-1 receptors of cardiomyocytes. At doses (>5 μg/kg/minute), it causes potent vasoconstriction via alpha-1 adrenergic receptors of the vessels. This could lead to severe hypertension and tachyarrhythmia at these high doses. Dopamine and epinephrine have strong beta-adrenergic effect and cause increased HR, stroke volume and CO. The effect of dopamine is maximum in the dose range of 5 to 10 μg/kg/minute, and higher degree of vasoconstriction at doses more than 10 μg/kg/minute.
67
 The half -life of dopamine is less than 2 minutes and dose adjustments are not necessary in renal failure.
68

Dobutamine is a β adrenergic agonist with strong β1 adrenergic activity and weak β2 adrenergic and α1 adrenergic activity. The half -life of dobutamine is 2 minutes and dose adjustments are not necessary in renal failure.
69
 It achieves steady state effects in minutes as it is rapidly cleared in the blood. It also acts on peripheral vasculature through vascular alpha-1 and beta-2 receptors. At low doses (<5 μg/kg/minute), it increases CO and lowers afterload by exerting vasodilatory action on peripheral vessels. At doses (>5 μg/kg/minute), dobutamine causes vasoconstriction via its agonistic action on alpha-1 receptors. When dobutamine is given more than 10 μg/kg/minute, it can worsen tachycardia in patients without additional CO increase.
67

Milrinone is a phosphodiesterase III inhibitor. Phosphodiesterase III enzyme is responsible for the degradation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate. Inhibition of this enzyme leads to increased cyclic adenosine monophosphate which increases the phosphorylation of calcium influx channels. This results in increased calcium concentration within the cells promoting actin-myosin cross bridging leading to increased myocardial contractility. It also causes peripheral vasodilation through its action on the vascular bed by inhibiting myosin light chain activation in the vascular smooth muscles.
70
 The half -life of milrinone is 2.3 to 2.4 hours in heart failure as well as renal impairment. Milrinone should be initiated at doses less than 0.0625 to 0.125 mcg/kg/minute if creatinine clearance is 10 to 50 mL/minute.
70
 Milrinone doses >0.5 μg/kg/minute can lead to hypotension.
49

Levosimendan is a calcium sensitizer that increases cardiac contractility by increasing the sensitivity of troponin C to intracellular calcium in the cardiomyocyte. Both milrinone and levosimendan are preferred over beta adrenergic inotropes in patients receiving beta blockers as their action does not involve the beta-adrenergic pathway.
66
 Along with its positive inotropic effect, levosimendan causes peripheral vasodilation through the opening of ATP-sensitive potassium channel on the vasculature smooth muscle cells. The half -life of levosimendan is 1 hour and of its active metabolite is 70 to 80 hours. Renal impairment prolongs its half-life. Due to the increased half-life, the drug is found to persist even after 24hrs of cessation of the drug and this is used clinically by giving intermittent pulse doses of the drug.
71
 It is not available in the United States.
71
 Milrinone and levosimendan have longer renal clearance and half-life causing delayed steady state effects.
70

Vasopressors act via multiple receptors to increase intracellular calcium in the vascular myocyte, causing peripheral vasoconstriction, increased systemic vascular resistance, and thus the MAP. The use of catecholamines is considered a cornerstone in the treatment of cardiogenic shock. Vasopressor agents are used in up to 90% of patients in cardiogenic shock.
62
 They are a class IIb/c and class IIb/b recommendation of the European Society of Cardiology guidelines in the management of cardiogenic shock.
61

The commonly used catecholamine vasopressors are norepinephrine, epinephrine, dopamine, and phenylephrine. Vasopressors act through multiple receptors to augment cytosolic calcium availability in vascular myocytes causing vasoconstriction which increases systemic vascular resistance and MAP.
49
 They all activate the α1 adrenergic receptors to increase MAP.
Randomized trials comparing inotropes and vasopressors have been difficult to perform and clinical evidence is scarce.
66
 Current recommendations on the use of vasopressors are through meta-analysis, expert opinion, and review articles.
Norepinephrine is the most frequently used vasopressor for the treatment of cardiogenic shock.2,72 Norepinephrine increases MAP without significant effect on the HR due its weak β adrenergic activity. Norepinephrine also increases CI without significant increase in myocardial oxygen demand due to its selective effect of β1 adrenergic receptor stimulation.
62
 Norepinephrine has similar vasopressor potency as epinephrine and phenylephrine and vasopressor effect greater than dopamine.
73
 The half -life of norepinephrine is 2 to 3 minutes and dose adjustments are not necessary in renal failure.
73
 It is usually infused at a rate of 0.01 to 0.3 μg/kg/minute and can be titrated up to 1 μg/kg/minute to achieve the targeted blood pressure. Side effects include hypertension, peripheral vasoconstriction leading to ischemia and arrhythmia, although norepinephrine is less proarrhythmogenic compared to epinephrine and dopamine.74,75
Epinephrine is the second line vasopressor and inotrope which had both α adrenergic and β adrenergic activity. Epinephrine has stronger β adrenergic 1,2 > α adrenergic receptor activity. At low doses epinephrine increases CO due to positive inotropic and chronotropic effect through the β1 adrenergic receptors. The vasoconstriction induced by α adrenergic receptor activation is compensated by vasodilation through β2 adrenergic receptor induced vasodilation. This results in decrease of SVR and variable effects on MAP. But at higher doses due to predominant α adrenergic activity, epinephrine increase MAP by increasing HR, SVR and contractility.
76
 The half -life of epinephrine is <5 minutes and dose adjustments are not necessary in renal failure.
62
 The dose of epinephrine use in cardiogenic shock ranges from 0.01 to 0.3 ug/kg/minute. Due to its effects on SVR, epinephrine increases right ventricular pressure as well as pulmonary artery pressure.
76
 Myocardial oxygen demand is increased due to its effect on heart rate.
77
 Other side effects include arrhythmias, splanchnic vasoconstriction which is more pronounced when compared to norepinephrine and dopamine.
78
 Epinephrine use is also associated with higher lactate and glucose levels.
79

Vasopressin acts through the vasopressin 1 receptors to cause vasoconstriction and raises MAP. It does not have any inotropic effects and causes reduction in HR and CO.
48
 Vasopressin is used as a second line vasopressor in septic shock but evidence for its use in cardiogenic shock is lacking. There have been no randomized control trials on vasopressin use in cardiogenic shock.
79
 The half -life of vasopressin is 10 to 20 minutes and dose adjustments are not necessary in renal failure.
80
 The dose recommended ranges from 0.01 to 0.04 units/minute. Vasopressin was found to be helpful to wean off or in dose reduction of other catecholamines in septic shock.
81
 Vasopressin use in vasoplegia syndrome following cardiac surgery and post-cardiotomy syndrome was associated with lower incidence of complications.82,83 Vasopressin can be used as an additional agent in vasodilatory shock in addition to norepinephrine in patients requiring high norepinephrine doses and in patients with refractory vasodilatory shock in AMI to improve MAP.26,84 There is a growing body of interest regarding the use of vasopressin in right ventricular failure and shock due to its selective action on pulmonary vascular bed. Vasopressin does not cause pulmonary vasoconstriction unlike epinephrine and dopamine.
62
 Vasopressin is associated with lower risk of arrhythmias when compared to other catecholamines.
85
 Vasopressin is more expensive when compared to other catecholamines and its escalation and dose titration are not well studied. Higher doses (>0.04 units/minute) of vasopressin is associated with systemic vasoconstriction and skin necrosis. Other side effects include hyponatremia and diabetes insipidus.
86

Phenylephrine is a pure α1 adrenergic agonist that increases MAP by increasing SVR which leads to decrease in cardiac contractility and reflex bradycardia.
77
 Due to its adverse effects and paucity of adequately powered trials phenylephrine is not recommended in the treatment of cardiogenic shock.
63

Though vasopressors and inotropes are ubiquitously used in cardiogenic shock, prior literature in cardiogenic shock does not quantify vasoactive medications holistically. Prior work in non-cardiogenic shock states, such as septic shock, has shown cumulative vasoactive indices to predict mortality with higher accuracy that traditional risk scores. The Modified Cardiovascular Sequential Organ Failure Assessment score (Modified SOFA) by Yadav et al
45
 demonstrated the importance of incorporating vasoactive medication indices into the existing cardiovascular component of the SOFA score. Modified SOFA score incorporates shock index as a substitute for MAP, serum lactate, and all vasoactive agents used in clinical practice. The vasopressors included were epinephrine, norepinephrine, vasopressin, dopamine, or phenylephrine, and the inotropes included were dobutamine and milrinone. The use of one vasoactive agent was assigned 2 points. Use of 2 or more vasoactive agents simultaneously was assigned 3 points. The use of higher doses of dopamine (>5 μg/kg/minute), epinephrine (>0.05 μg/kg/minute), or norepinephrine (>0.15 μg/kg/minute) at any time during the first 24 hours of ICU stay was assigned 4 points.
Our group has previously developed a risk prognostication system using a quantitative vasoactive medication scoring system, that was noted to be superior to the APACHE III and SOFA scores in outcomes prediction in septic shock.87,88 The following scoring systems (a) norepinephrine equivalents,
89
 (b) vasoactive inotropic score,90,91 and (c) cumulative vasopressor index
92
 were used to quantify the overall peak vasoactive medication requirements. A similar body of work is urgently needed in patients with cardiogenic shock to understand the correlation of vasoactive medication requirements with escalation to mechanical circulatory support, short-term mortality, development of organ failure and recovery of ventricular function.
The need for high-dose vasopressors reflects a potentially fatal underlying condition with a high risk of complication. Refractory shock is defined by persistent hypotension despite a high dose of vasopressor therapy (>0.5 μg/kg/minute norepinephrine equivalents).57,92 Patients requiring a high dose to maintain MAP can be considered to have refractory shock and are at high risk of death.
92
 High doses of vasopressors are associated with adverse effects like arrhythmias, myocardial infarctions, digital ischemia, and acute kidney injury.26,41
Randomized control and clinical trials on the use of vasopressors and inotropes in cardiogenic shock have been limited, and the recommendations for its use are largely from meta-analyses and expert opinions. A large Cochrane review did not demonstrate any superiority of individual inotropes and vasopressors in the treatment of cardiogenic shock.
93
 The SOAP II (Sepsis Occurrence in Acutely ill Patients) trial was the largest clinical trial evaluating the use of vasopressors in shock. In an all-comer shock population, dopamine and norepinephrine had comparable outcomes.
75
 In a sub-group analyses, use of dopamine was associated with higher mortality in patients with cardiogenic shock.1,75 Given the sub-group analyses of cardiogenic shock from the larger cohort of circulatory shock, the lack of differentiation on the etiology of cardiogenic shock, and the broad definitions used to define cardiogenic shock, the results of this trial need further validation in dedicated randomized trials. Dopamine was associated with higher rates of arrhythmia and gastrointestinal reaction.94,95 Dopamine is not indicated routinely in patients with cardiogenic shock. Similarly, a comparison of dobutamine to milrinone in an all-comer cardiogenic shock population, which was largely post-cardiotomy, did not demonstrate clear superiority of either agent.
96
 In AMI patients with pre-shock (i.e. normotensive with signs of congestion) and acute heart failure, milrinone was associated with improved outcomes compared to placebo
96
 In recent times, levosimendan has been keenly studied outside the United States as a potential therapy for cardiogenic shock.
97
 A 6-hour infusion of levosimendan (0.1-0.2 μg/kg/minute) did not increase hypotension or ischemia significantly, alluding to the safety profile of this medication. Many studies98-100 have previously reported the favorable short-term effects of levosimendan treatment in a small series of patients with cardiogenic shock. In patients with ST-segment-elevation AMI complicated by cardiogenic shock, levosimendan increased CI, CO, and left ventricular ejection fraction at short-term significantly more than dobutamine,
101
 however it did not demonstrate any long-term outcome improvements.
98

Levy et al
73
 conducted a contemporary randomized trial comparing the effects and safety of norepinephrine and epinephrine in AMI-cardiogenic shock. The primary end points were similar in both groups. But the incidence of refractory shock was higher in the epinephrine group (10 of 27 [37%] vs norepinephrine 2 of 30 [7%]; P = .008). This led to the early termination of the study. They also showed that epinephrine was associated with higher heart rate, higher double product (indicating higher myocardial oxygen demands) and lactate levels when compared to norepinephrine.
73

Tarvasmaki et al,
72
 in a sub-study of the CardShock study, attempted to evaluate the real-life use and outcomes of vasopressors and inotropes in cardiogenic shock. Of the 219 patients, Vasopressors and/or inotropes were used in 94% of the study population. Norepinephrine was used in 75% and epinephrine in 21% of patients. Epinephrine was independently associated with increased mortality with odds ratio of 5.2(95 % confidence interval 1.88, 14.7, P = .002). Norepinephrine was also associated with worsening renal and cardiac markers at the first few days. Dobutamine (49%) and levosimendan (24%) was the commonly used inotrope in the study.
72

In a meta-analysis, Karami et al
102
 investigated current evidence on outcomes on inotropes and vasopressors in patients with AMI related CS. They found that treatment with noradrenaline, adrenaline, levosimendan, dobutamine, and dopamine were not associated with a difference in short term or long-term mortality. The overall quality of evidence was graded low. They also found a positive trend toward better outcome with levosimendan, compared with control. Overall, they found insufficient evidence that vasopressors and inotropes routinely are associated with reduced mortality in patients with AMI-CS and hence emphasized on the need for proper randomized trials. Uhlig et al
103
 assessed the efficacy and safety of cardiac care with positive inotropic agents and vasodilators in CS or low cardiac output syndrome due to AMI, heart failure or after cardiac surgery. The study compared the efficacy of levosimendan versus dobutamine, enoximone or placebo; enoximone versus dobutamine, piroximone or epinephrine-nitroglycerine; epinephrine versus norepinephrine or norepinephrine-dobutamine; dopexamine versus dopamine; milrinone versus dobutamine and dopamine-milrinone versus dopamine-dobutamine. With a low to very low quality of evidence, all these comparisons showed uncertainty on the effect of inotropic/vasodilatory drugs on all-cause mortality. Leopold et al
104
 evaluated the association between epinephrine use and short-term mortality in all-cause CS participants. A positive correlation was found between percentage of epinephrine use and short-term mortality. They found that in the hemodynamic management of CS patients, epinephrine was associated with threefold increase of risk of death.
104

The American Heart Association guidelines
1
 for the management of CS mentions that norepinephrine may be the vasopressor of choice in many patients with CS as it is associated with fewer arrhythmias.
1
 However, the optimal first-line vasoactive medication in CS remains unclear and no specific drug is mentioned. Due to the heterogeneity in the etiology and inciting factors for CS, these guidelines recommend different vasoactive medications for each presentation of CS. The European Society of Cardiology 2017 Guidelines
61
 for the management of AMI-CS patients with ST-elevation recommend norepinephrine as a vasoconstrictor of choice when BP is low and tissue perfusion pressure is insufficient (class IIb) based on a study (De Backer et al )
75
 showing lower rate of arrhythmia and lower mortality compared to dopamine subgroup. To improve cardiac contractility (class IIb), inotropes like dobutamine may be given simultaneously to norepinephrine.
61

The range of studies on the use of all these drugs in CS discussed in (Table 1) clearly shows much uncertainty surrounding the subject. Nevertheless, inotropes and vasopressors continue to be an essential component in the management of CS by maintaining MAP of 65 to 70 mm Hg and thereby preventing tissue hypoperfusion and the resulting organ dysfunction.
103
 As demonstrated by Pei et al,
106
 currently, the use of these drugs varies between physicians and the conditions in different centers. Therefore, they suggest the rationalization and clinical judgment in the use of these drugs for management of shock needs to be improved and the treatments must be standardized.
106
 Lastly, the introduction of the SCAI stages of CS need to be retrospectively applied to the older trials, to understand the stage of CS at which these medications were initiated, which may explain the heterogeneity in the data.
Trials of inotropes and vasopressors in shock.
As acknowledged in the review of existing clinical trials, there remains significant heterogeneity in the literature due to differing inclusion criteria, differences in severity of illness (SCAI staging), varying etiology (AMI vs non-AMI), and lack of adequate controlling for confounding, specifically concomitant cardiac arrest. In light of these limitations, our proposed algorithm needs to be individualized to patients. The majority of the data recommends norepinephrine as the primary vasoactive medication of choice, with the subsequent addition of vasopressin or epinephrine to achieve additional vasopressor with or without inotropic support. Further escalation to additional inotropic support such as higher dose epinephrine versus initiation of dobutamine and milrinone need to bee cautiously titrated against the complications of tachyarrhythmias and peripheral vasodilation. In patients with AMI etiology of CS, vasopressors might be preferred to inotropes to prevent worsening of myocardial ischemia, whereas in acute heart failure with CS, inotropes might be indicated to assist in decongestion. Often when a second or third vasoactive medication is required, we encourage the use of invasive hemodynamic measurement to understand the impact of cardiogenic versus distributive shock to appropriately titrate further medications. This will additionally assist with assessing biventricular function and providing baseline information for escalation to mechanical circulatory support as indicated.
Although vasopressors and inotropes are used as a mainstay of pharmacologic management of cardiogenic shock, studies on these agents are scarce. The review highlights the pharmacologic management of cardiogenic shock focusing on vasoactive medications. Vasopressors and inotropes are reasonable options for initial medical management of cardiogenic shock to optimize volume status and maintain tissue perfusion. But safety concerns and risk profile indicate that the use of these medications should be for the shortest duration of time with the lowest doses. An individualized patient approach should be adapted to choose the vasoactive agents based on the hemodynamic and clinical profile. Pharmacologic management with early use of mechanical circulatory devices in a shock team approach has demonstrated improved outcomes in cardiogenic shock, but randomized control trials are needed to study the detailed incorporation of vasoactive and inotropic agents in the setting of cardiogenic shock teams and protocols.
Declaration of conflicting interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding: The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Author Contributions: Review design, literature review: AS, GG, SV.
Data management, data analysis, drafting of manuscript: AS, GG, SV.
Access to data: AS, GG, LS, DG, WJN, WAJ, SV.
Manuscript revision, intellectual revisions, mentorship: LS, DG, WJN, WAJ, SV.
Final approval: AS, GG, LS, DG, WJN, WAJ, SV.
Disclosures: All authors report no relevant disclosures related to the contents of this manuscript.
ORCID iDs: Gayathri Gurumurthy 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2481-7149
Lakshmi Sridharan 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4855-4892
Saraschandra Vallabhajosyula 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1631-8238
Articles from Clinical Medicine Insights. Cardiology are provided here courtesy of SAGE Publications

==================================================

Title: Mechanical circulatory support in cardiogenic shock
Authors: Yuki Ikeda, Jun Nakata, Keita Saku, Kuniya Asai, Takashi Unoki, Takeshi Yamamoto
Organizations: 
1Division of Cardiovascular Intensive Care, Nippon Medical School Hospital, 1-1-5 Sendagi, Bunkyo-Ku, Tokyo, 113-8603 Japan , 
1Division of Cardiovascular Intensive Care, Nippon Medical School Hospital, 1-1-5 Sendagi, Bunkyo-Ku, Tokyo, 113-8603 Japan , 
2Department of Cardiovascular Dynamics, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center Research, Suita, Osaka Japan , 
3Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kitasato University, School of Medicine, Sagamihara, Kanagawa Japan , 
4Department of Cardiology and Intensive Care Unit, Saiseikai Kumamoto Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan 
Text:
Cardiogenic shock is a complex and diverse pathological condition characterized by reduced myocardial contractility. The goal of treatment of cardiogenic shock is to improve abnormal hemodynamics and maintain adequate tissue perfusion in organs. If hypotension and insufficient tissue perfusion persist despite initial therapy, temporary mechanical circulatory support (t-MCS) should be initiated. This decade sees the beginning of a new era of cardiogenic shock management using t-MCS through the accumulated experience with use of intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) and venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO), as well as new revolutionary devices or systems such as transvalvular axial flow pump (Impella) and a combination of VA-ECMO and Impella (ECPELLA) based on the knowledge of circulatory physiology. In this transitional period, we outline the approach to the management of cardiogenic shock by t-MCS. The management strategy involves carefully selecting one or a combination of the t-MCS devices, taking into account the characteristics of each device and the specific pathological condition. This selection is guided by monitoring of hemodynamics, classification of shock stage, risk stratification, and coordinated management by the multidisciplinary shock team.
Cardiogenic shock is caused by the disease with impaired function of the myocardium, valve, conduction system, or pericardium, either in isolation or in combination. The most common pathology of cardiogenic shock is a clinical condition characterized by reduced myocardial contractility, which may lead to a vicious cycle of decreased cardiac output, low blood pressure, perpetuating further coronary ischemia and impaired contractility, ultimately resulting in multi-organ dysfunction. In addition, venous congestion leads to congestive organ damage, which is associated with increased mortality rate [1].
A contemporary registry has reported that as many as 81% of patients presenting with cardiogenic shock had underlying acute coronary syndrome (ACS) including acute myocardial infarction (AMI) [2]. An estimated up to 20% of patients with AMI potentially developed cardiogenic shock in the past, but recent clinical trials and observational studies have reported rates of  7–10% [3]. Although the development of cardiogenic shock has decreased over the years due to innovative therapies of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) for early revascularization and optimal medical therapy for AMI, the in-hospital mortality rate of AMI concomitant with cardiogenic shock (Killip IV) is still high. According to the Swiss AMI registry over the past 20 years, in-hospital mortality of AMI with cardiogenic shock (Killip IV) decreased from 62.2% in 1997 to 36.3% in 2017 [4]. Similar findings are also reported in Asian countries such as Japan. The Tokyo Cardiovascular Care Unit Network registry reported that in-hospital mortality rate of AMI with cardiogenic shock (Killip IV) ranged from 38.5% in 2007 to 27.2% in 2016 [5].
The goal of treatment of cardiogenic shock is to improve abnormal hemodynamics and maintain adequate tissue perfusion in organs. If hypotension and insufficient tissue perfusion persist despite initial therapy, temporary mechanical circulatory support (t-MCS) should be initiated. Recently, the utilization rates of different modalities of t-MCS, such as intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP), venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) and transvalvular axial flow pump (Impella; Abiomed Inc. Danvers, MA, USA) for the treatment of cardiogenic shock have changed remarkably. According to the Japanese Diagnosis Procedure Combination database containing 160,559 eligible patients over this decade, the prevalence of using IABP alone decreased significantly from 80.5% in 2010 to 65.3% in 2020 (P for trend < 0.001), whereas the prevalence of Impella alone increased significantly from 0.0% to 5.0% and ECMO from 19.5% to 29.6% (P for trend < 0.001 for both) [6]. In this transition period, it is necessary to select and use one or a combination of these devices appropriately based on the understanding of the characteristics of each device from the aspect of circulatory support and left ventricular (LV) unload, and tailored them to the pathological conditions of individual patients.
The mechanical effects on the LV varied among the systems used in t-MCS. The mechanical properties of the LV can be described by the pressure‒volume (PV) loop, with pressure and volume plotted on the same plane. The slope of the end-systolic pressure‒volume relation (ESPVR), Ees, indicates the load-independent contractile function of the ventricle, while the end-diastolic pressure‒volume relation (EDPVR) represents the ventricular diastolic property. The systolic pressure‒volume area (PVA) (Fig. 1A) bounded by the ESPVR, EDPVR and the pulsatile systolic pressure‒volume curve of the PV loop, is the total mechanical energy generated by contraction and is linearly related to myocardial oxygen consumption [7, 8].

PV loops under various t-MCS conditions for the treatment of cardiogenic shock. Illustrations of PV loops in cardiogenic shock or cardiogenic shock with several MCS support conditions. A In cardiogenic shock, acute decrease of Ees shifts the PV loop rightward and reduces the stroke volume and LV pressure. B–H PV loops under various support conditions: IABP, VA-ECMO, VA-ECMO + IABP, Impella partial support, Impella total support, ECPELLA total support, and ECPELLA total unloading. PV loop pressure–volume loop, t-MCS temporary mechanical circulatory support, CGS cardiogenic shock, IABP intra-aortic balloon pump, VA-ECMO venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, ECPELLA VA-ECMO + Impella, Ea effective arterial elastance, Ees end-systolic elastance, SV stroke volume, PVA pressure‒volume area, EDP end-diastolic pressure, EDPVR end-diastolic pressure‒volume relation, ESPVR end-systolic pressure‒volume relation
IABP is still the most commonly used modality of t-MCS. The catheter itself is a double-lumen 7–8 Fr catheter with a polyethylene balloon with inflation and deflation synchronized with the electrocardiogram (ECG) or pressure triggers. IABP increases diastolic blood pressure, decreases afterload, decreases myocardial oxygen consumption, increases coronary artery perfusion and cardiac output, and provides modest ventricular unloading. Monitoring for proper IABP operation checks that the aortic pressure waveform obtained from the IABP balloon tip is appropriately augmented in diastole and unloaded in systole.
The direct effect of IABP on the LV is a decrease in end-systolic pressure due to rapid deflation of the balloon during systole, resulting in systolic unloading. IABP-induced systolic unloading increases stroke volume (SV) (Fig. 1B) to a limited extent [9, 10]. Although there is no direct mechanical effect on the LV during diastole, the preservation of LV function by maintaining or increasing coronary blood flow and maintenance of peripheral organ perfusion by increasing pulse pressure are important clinical benefits of IABP.
Regarding the prognostic value of IABP in increasing coronary artery perfusion pressure, the BCIS-1 trial reported that in high-risk PCI with ejection fraction (EF) < 30%, IABP support reduced major adverse cardiac and cerebrovascular events at discharge and decreased mortality by 34% at a median of 51 months [11]. There is no clear evidence that IABP improves the prognosis of AMI, although it has a hemodynamic stabilizing effect by increasing coronary perfusion pressure. The CRISP trial showed that IABP during primary PCI did not reduce infarct size in anterior ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) [12]. Although IABP is widely used clinically, a prospective randomized controlled trial failed to demonstrate conclusive proof of its benefits for cardiogenic shock. The IABP-Shock II study published in 2013 showed that IABP placement in patients with cardiogenic shock due to ACS did not reduce 30-day mortality and showed no improvement in 6-year outcomes [13].
Based on these findings, the 2014 European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines downgraded the use of IABP in patients with cardiogenic shock due to ACS from “recommended” (Class I) in the past to “not recommended” (Class III) [14]. On the other hand, the Japan Circulation Society guidelines recommend IABP for mechanical complications of AMI (Class I), recommend IABP to be considered in patients with cardiogenic shock and prolonged myocardial ischemia after reperfusion (Class IIa), and do not recommend IABP for routine use in patients with cardiogenic shock (Class III) [15, 16].
Given the paucity of sufficiently powered randomized trials of t-MCS, most data on complication rates of IABP originate from observational case series and registries. Kapur et al. [17] reviewed evidence from available randomized trials and compared the complication rates obtained from randomized trials with case series and comparative observational studies. In their large sample, bleeding occurred in 12.9% of patients treated with IABP, 27.7% treated with Impella, and 28.2% treated with VA-ECMO, while limb ischemia occurred in 1.5%, 4.2%, and 14.3%, respectively, and stroke in 3.1%, 4.9%, and 8.2%, respectively. The apparent trend from these data showed higher rates of bleeding and vascular injury with Impella compared to IABP, which are associated with devices requiring larger bore access, and higher rate of stroke also with Impella than with IABP. All three rates were higher still with VA-ECMO. Thus, given the lack of conclusive proof of benefits of IABP for cardiogenic shock but an apparently favorable safety profile, the use of IABP should be considered when other t-MCS devices are not available, or when the risk of complications including stroke, bleeding, and limb ischemia is increased by management using other t-MCS devices.
VA-ECMO is a percutaneous ventricular assist device consisting of a membrane artificial lung and a closed circuit with a centrifugal pump. A venous cannula (17–24 Fr) drains deoxygenated blood into a membrane oxygenator for gas exchange, and oxygenated blood is subsequently infused into the patient via an arterial cannula (14–19 Fr). Pressure generated by VA-ECMO, which is the product of VA-ECMO flow and systemic vascular resistance, loads the LV during systole. Although the venous return to the LV is reduced by VA-ECMO, the increase of LV afterload reduces SV. As a result, especially in a depressed LV, VA-ECMO enlarges PVA (Fig. 1C) [18, 19]. Therefore, IABP or Impella is used to reduce the LV afterload induced by VA-ECMO in clinical practice. However, as shown in Fig. 1D, IABP provides limited leftward shift of the PV loop under the condition of VA-ECMO support.
Because VA-ECMO provides the highest flow rate (3.0–7.0 L/min) among all the t-MCS devices, which improves metabolic derangement and deleterious systemic effects, it may confer a modest mortality benefit in cardiogenic shock [20, 21]. In the SAVE-J trial, Sakamoto et al. [22] examined the beneficial effect of VA-ECMO as resuscitation therapy in additional to conventional cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) for cardiac arrest patients.
The International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation/Heart Failure Society of America guidelines state that VA-ECMO may be considered as an adjunct to conventional CPR for extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (Class IIc) in patients with cardiac arrest, who are expected to regain cardiac function and for whom appropriate CPR is being performed [23]. ESC guidelines also state that the use of VA-ECMO may be considered for severe cardiogenic shock, in-hospital and out-of-hospital cardiac arrest in individual cases (Class IIb) [14]. In Japan, VA-ECMO is considered for use in patients with cardiogenic shock refractory to drug therapy (Class IIa), and may also be considered in situations of progressive circulatory failure due to mechanical complications or in situations where maintenance of circulation until surgery is difficult (Class IIb) [15, 16].
Although VA-ECMO has established an indispensable position in resuscitation management, notably the disadvantages of this therapy need to be considered, such as bleeding, thromboembolic events, and hemolysis. In addition, considerable attention in management is required to avoid the risk of increased myocardial oxygen demand and myocardial remodeling due to increased LV afterload caused by retrograde blood flow as well as exacerbation of oxygenation.
In the setting of concomitant respiratory failure, after the LV recovers and begins to eject, deoxygenated blood returned from the compromised lungs will begin to merge with oxygenated blood from the ECMO circuit at a site known as the mixing point. Resulting regional or differential hypoxemia can then occur, and the more distal the mixing point, the greater the risk for cerebral hypoxemia. It is recommended that the right radial artery as well as right upper torso pulse oximetry should routinely be used for blood gas as well as tissue oxygenation to immediately detect regional or differential hypoxia [24].
Impella is a non-pulsatile axial flow Archimedes-screw pump designed to pump blood from the LV into the ascending aorta. The 12 Fr (Impella 2.5) and 14 Fr (Impella CP) devices that provide maximal flow rates of 2.5 L/min and 3.7 L/min, respectively, are designed to be placed via the femoral artery. On the other hand, the 21 Fr (Impella 5.5) device with maximal flow rate of 5.5 L/min requires a surgical cutdown for deployment axillary or femoral artery. A possible advantage of the axillary approach is the potential for long-term support. Concerning the hemodynamic effects, Impella reduces myocardial oxygen consumption, improves mean arterial pressure, and reduces pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP), which reduces native LV stroke work and wall stress.
Impella drains blood from the LV and pumps it into the aorta. Regarding monitoring of pump flow settings, attention should be paid to pulse pressure and mean arterial pressure. A non-pulsatile arterial signal suggests uncoupling between LV and systemic pressure. A change from pulsatility to nonpulsatility should trigger echocardiography to ensure proper positioning of the device, but nonpulsatility may suggest that the left ventricle is well unloaded [25].
We have reported the impact of Impella on the PV loop in a canine study and a clinical study in patients with AMI complicated with cardiogenic shock [26, 27]. With Impella partial support, in which the LV remains ejecting, total cardiac output increases thereby increasing blood pressure. This leads to increase in LV end-systolic volume despite marked reduction in LV end-diastolic volume. Consequently, partial support by Impella does not sufficiently reduce PVA (Fig. 1E). On the other hand, with Impella total support, LV no longer ejects because LV pressure never reaches blood pressure. Thus, total support with Impella renders PVA extremely small (Fig. 1F).
The safety and efficacy of using Impella in AMI with cardiogenic shock has been verified in clinical trials. The USpella Registry showed hemodynamic improvement of using Impella 2.5 in AMI patients with cardiogenic shock who did not improve with inotropic drugs or IABP [28]. In the MACH II study that examined the effect of Impella 2.5 on long-term cardiac function in patients with anterior STEMI, significant improvement was observed after three years when compared to a control group treated with conventional therapy [29]. Ikeda et al. [30] reported the treatment outcome of Impella for AMI (Killip IV) in the J-PVAD registry, showing favorable 30-day survival rate of 80.9% with Impella alone compared with 63.1% overall. Concerning the effect of Impella support with revascularization and optimal medical therapy (OMT) on cardiac function, mean (± SD) left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 35 ± 12.1% prior to Impella treatment and improved significantly to 44.7 ± 11.0% at Impella explant (P < 0.001).
Two randomized control trials compared IABP with Impella. In the ISAR-SHOCK study reported in 2008, 25 patients with AMI and cardiogenic shock were randomized to treatment with Impella 2.5 (12 patients) or IABP (13 patients). The primary endpoint of cardiac output (CO) improved significantly in the Impella group compared with the IABP group (0.49 ± 0.46 vs. 0.11 ± 0.31, P < 0.05) [31]. In contrast, the IMPRESS trial reported in 2015 found no difference in survival outcome between Impella and IABP. This trial randomized 48 patients with severe cardiogenic shock caused by AMI to Impella CP (24 patients) or IABP (24 patients). The primary endpoint of all-cause mortality at 5 years was 11/24 (46%) in the Impella CP group and 12/24 (50%) in the IABP group, with no significant difference between the two groups [32].
Although Impella has significant benefits of hemodynamic stabilization and LV unloading, its use has potential risk of complications. The most common complications of Impella are limb ischemia, bleeding requiring blood transfusion, and hemolysis. These complications require accurate evaluation and preventive measures, which should be detailed in the protocol to ensure safe and reliable management for better therapeutic results.
In patients with prolonged shock and cardiac arrest, MCS using a combination of VA-ECMO and Impella, so-called ECPELLA or ECMELLA, is recently used to maintain organ perfusion and oxygenation and restore cardiac function by LV unloading.
As mentioned above, although VA-ECMO has the advantage of increasing blood pressure, it may potentially increase LV afterload and shift the PV loop to the right, leading to an increase in PVA. ECPELLA reduces the VA-ECMO-induced increase in PVA, while blood pressure continues to increase, as shown in simulation studies [33] (Fig. 1G). Thus, ECPELLA is a treatment that allows hemodynamic stabilization while reducing PVA. The degree of PVA reduction varies depending on the ECPELLA support condition. In addition, we often experience the “total unloading” condition that represents a marked reduction of PVA (Fig. 1H) during ECPELLA management [34, 35]. In the management of PVA, control of blood pressure is critical not only in terms of reducing PVA, but also reducing overload to the pump head of the centrifugal and axial pumps such as VA-ECMO and Impella. Figure 2 illustrates the hemodynamic and PV loop alterations under various ECPELLA settings. The cardiovascular parameters employed for the simulation are depicted in the right column. In the simulation, we adjusted the right and left ventricular systolic function (Ees) and diastolic function (α, β), the x-intercept of ESPVR, stressed blood volume (SBV), pulmonary (PVR) and systemic (SVR) vascular resistance to create the cardiogenic shock condition as shown in Fig. 2A. In the simulation, we sequentially established ECPELLA by incorporating VA-ECMO (Fig. 2B) and Impella CP (P4 level) (Fig. 2C), maintaining the initial cardiovascular settings. When vasodilators are further administered to decrease systemic vascular resistance (1.2–0.5 mmHg*min/L), the PV loop changes as shown in Fig. 2D. Compared to ECPELLA total support (Fig. 2C), ECPELLA with blood pressure lowering showed remarkable reduction of PVA and increase of total flow, despite the partial support condition.

The impact of aortic pressure on ECPELLA-supported PV loop. In cardiogenic shock condition (A), VA-ECMO markedly increases total systemic flow, while loading LV and increasing PVA (B). Addition of Impella to VA-ECMO decreases PVA (C). Further addition of a vasodilator that decreases blood pressure further reduces PVA markedly, and further increases total systemic flow (D). The simulation was conducted using our electrical model reported previously [33]. The cardiovascular parameters employed for the simulation are depicted in the right column. MCS mechanical circulatory support, VA-ECMO venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, ECPELLA combination of VA-ECMO and Impella, AOP aortic pressure, LAP left atrial pressure, LVP left ventricular pressure, LVCO left ventricular cardiac output, PV pressure‒volume, PVA pressure‒volume area, LV-Ees left ventricular end-systolic elastance, RV-Ees right ventricular end-systolic elastance, EDPVR end-diastolic pressure–volume relationship, V0 the volume intercept of end-systolic pressure volume relationship of LV, SBV stressed blood volume, SVR systemic vascular resistance, PVR pulmonary vascular resistance
Although ECPELLA reduces PVA remarkably by effectively regulating the flow rate between the VA-ECMO and Impella, reducing PVA to the limit is tantamount to collapsing the LV. In some cases, LV suction by Impella may have the risk of causing ventricular arrhythmias, hemolysis, and pump malfunction. In addition, optimal management of blood pressure in patients treated with ECPELLA is also important, since excessively elevated mean blood pressure may be a paroxysmal cause of intracranial hemorrhage. Note that aortic regurgitation (AR) may occur in the gap between the Impella shaft and the aortic valve leaflets, which would hamper PVA reduction by Impella [36]. Thus, appropriate intravascular volume and optimal blood pressure are indispensable for the control of t-MCS flow and prevention of AR.
Currently, controversy exists regarding optimal regulation of PVA when the heart is recovering from acute injury. Mazurek et al. [37] reported that acute reloading induces cardiac apoptosis. On the other hand, Diakos et al. [38] showed that cardiac reloading through an LV assist device normalizes metabolism. Further studies are needed to clarify the optimal PVA regulation by t-MCS according to the clinical situation.
In a clinical study, Schrage et al. [39] investigated the efficacy of ECMELLA in patients with cardiogenic shock by comparing 255 patients treated with VA-ECMO alone and 255 patients with ECMELLA (VA-ECMO + Impella). They reported significantly improved 30-day mortality in the ECMELLA group compared to the VA-ECMO group (HR 0.79, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.63‒0.98, p = 0.03). Furthermore, a sub-analysis showed improved 30-day mortality in the group receiving Impella within 2 h of VA-ECMO initiation (HR 0.76, 95% CI 0.60‒0.97, p = 0.03), but not in the group receiving Impella more than 2 h later (HR 0.77, 95% CI 0.51‒1.16, p = 0.22). Regarding the effect of LV unloading in patients with profound cardiogenic shock caused by AMI treated with ECPELLA, a report from the J-PVAD registry studied 300 patients with a high rate of out-of-hospital cardiac attack (32.3%), long duration of shock-to-Impella support [176 (103‒319) min] and high lactate level [8.7 (4.3‒13.4) mmol/L]. Of the patients treated with ECPELLA, 50 patients with available LVEF data prior to Impella support and at Impella explant were analyzed. Mean LVEF in these patients improved from 24.9 ± 14.2% prior to treatment to 44.0 ± 16.6 at Impella explant (P < 0.001) [30]. Despite improvement in short-term mortality, patients treated with ECPELLA had significantly higher rates of bleeding, hemolysis, limb ischemic, and renal replacement therapy compared to those treated with VA-ECMO alone. Cappannoli et al. [40] conducted a systematic literature review comparing ECPELLA with VA-ECMO alone in patients with cardiogenic shock. ECPELLA was associated with increased bleeding (risk ratio [RR] 1.45, 95% CI 1.20–1.75), hemolysis (RR 1.71, 95% CI 1.41–2.07), limb ischemia (RR 1.43, 95% CI 1.17–1.75), need for kidney replacement therapy (RR 1.54, 95% CI 1.19–1.99), and a non-significant increase in severe infections (RR 1.26, 95% CI 0.84–1.89) compared with VA-ECMO alone.
The intensity and degree of invasiveness of monitoring should depend on the severity and degree of instability of shock, the underlying etiology, the comorbidities, and the patient’s metabolic profile. Basic monitoring is advised to include serial assessment of lactate from blood gas analyses and monitoring of mixed venous or central venous blood saturation (SVO2) and urine output. Patients supported by t-MCS should be monitored with an arterial line, a central venous catheter, regular imaging by transthoracic echocardiogram and frequent use of pulmonary artery catheters [41].
Changes in both systemic and pulmonary arterial pulse pressure, or pulsatility, reflect the native heart recovery. Absent or very low pulsatility suggests severe cardiac contractile dysfunction or markedly reduced ventricular ejection. On the other hand, increasing pulsatility may be indicative of a recovering heart and improved native heart function. ETCO2 concentration can also be a useful parameter for detecting native heart recovery [42].
Daily echocardiography is advised to evaluate LV and right ventricular (RV) volume, recovery of native heart functions, signs of aortic or mitral valve regurgitation, pericardial effusion, LV thrombus, and the correct placement of the device.
Early placement of pulmonary artery catheterization (PAC) is advised to guide device settings, identify the potential need for escalation and venting, and evaluate signs of myocardial recovery. The American Heart Association scientific statement suggests placement of pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) to guide t-MCS device selection and use, unless there are absolute contraindications. Continuous PAC assessments combined with noninvasive imaging may also facilitate the appropriate escalation of t-MCS if clinical improvement is not observed with an initial t-MCS platform. Pressure tracings can be monitored continuously, and cardiac output measurements can be performed every 1–2 h, depending on shock severity [43].
In practice, PACs are used with the aim to identify the etiology of cardiogenic shock. For example, LV-dominant congestion in cardiogenic shock is often characterized by an elevated PAWP or LV end-diastolic pressure > 15 mmHg. Cardiac power output (CPO) can be obtained by a simple calculation: multiplying mean arterial pressure by cardiac output and dividing by a constant of 451. CPO has been shown to be the strongest hemodynamic predictor of mortality in the SHOCK trial and other clinical study [44–46]. Right ventricle (RV)-dominant congestion in cardiogenic shock is accompanied by a relatively normal PAWP in the setting of elevated right atrial (RA) pressure (> 15 mmHg) and elevated RA pressure to PAWP ratio (> 0.63 or 0.86), which should prompt further evaluation for RV failure [47–49]. In addition, the pulmonary artery pulsatility index [PAPi = (systolic pulmonary artery pressure − diastolic pulmonary artery pressure)/RA] is a hemodynamic variable used to identify RV failure. The prognostic cutoff value of PAPi differs between patients with AMI-cardiogenic shock (≤ 0.9) and patients with heart failure undergoing left ventricular assist device implantation (< 1.85) [50–52]. However, as the aforementioned hemodynamic parameters derived from PAC may be confounded by volume resuscitation, passive congestion, or concurrent valvular disease, integrating the assessment results of these invasive hemodynamic parameters with noninvasive cardiac imaging (echocardiography) is needed for diagnosing RV or biventricular failure.
The goal of cardiogenic shock treatment using t-MCS is to maintain adequate tissue perfusion and to break the vicious cycle of hemodynamic abnormalities. In the acute heart failure setting, Shiraishi et al. [53] advocated the importance of time-sensitive approach in the management of cardiogenic shock, including adjunctive t-MCS. When there are signs of tissue hypoperfusion including hemodynamic hypotension findings such as systolic BP (sBP) < 90 mmHg or mean BP (mBP) < 65 mmHg together with lactate level > 2 mmol/L, initial management should include administration of vasoactive agents, inotropic drugs and volume loading to improve sBP to > 90 mmHg or mBP > 65 mmHg with improved tissue perfusion. If another evaluation conducted within 10 min of the first evaluation and treatment reveals persistent hypoperfusion and shock signs, consideration of initiation of t-MCS is recommended.
In 2019, American Society for Cardiovascular Interventions (SCAI) experts published a consensus statement on the classification of cardiogenic shock [54]. The SCAI classification can be used easily at the bedside. It stratifies patients with cardiogenic shock into 5 categories: stage A is at risk; stage B is beginning of shock; stage C is classic cardiogenic shock; stage D is deteriorating or doom; and stage E is extremis (Fig. 3) [55]. By design, the SCAI classification system accounts for changes in clinical trajectory, allows more granularity in patient description, is specifically designed for this patient population, and can be used to optimize patient selection for future cardiogenic shock trial enrollment [56].

SCAI cardiogenic shock-classification. This figure was modified from Fig. 4 of the article. “SCAI SHOCK Stage Classification Expert Consensus Update: A Review and Incorporation of Validation Studies: This statement was endorsed by the American College of Cardiology (ACC), American College of Emergency Physicians (ACEP), American Heart Association (AHA), European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Association for Acute Cardiovascular Care (ACVC), International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT), Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM), and Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) in December 2021 [56]
Jentzer et al. [57] reviewed a database of 10,004 cardiogenic shock patients admitted to the cardiac intensive care unit at the Mayo Clinic between 2007 and 2015. In this cohort, they staged cardiogenic shock using the SCAI shock classification system and assessed the outcomes. The in-hospital mortality rates were 3.0% for stage A, 7.1% for stage B, 12.4% for stage C, 40.4% for stage D, and 67.0% for stage E, demonstrating the accuracy of the SCAI stage classification in stratifying clinical outcome. Hanson et al. [58] studied 300 AMI-cardiogenic shock patients enrolled in the NCSI registry between 2016 and 2019 and reported the prognostic value of the SCAI cardiogenic shock staging when applied at admission and at 24 h after initiation of t-MCS and completion of PCI. Among patients classified as stage C at admission, patients without worsening of stage after 24 h had survival rate of 84%, whereas patients who worsened from stage C to stage D had survival rate of 55%, and those from stage C to stage E had low survival of 17%. These results suggest that the key to improving survival outcome is to assess patients with cardiogenic shock for progression of the condition over time, to evaluate the stage of cardiogenic shock according to severity, and to introduce t-MCS at the appropriate timing.
Currently, the standardized and effective strategy for initiation and management of t-MCS in patients with cardiogenic shock includes timely assessment and tailored interventions prior to the development of the aforementioned detrimental cascade of shock status exemplified by the SCAI cardiogenic shock classification. A proposed management protocol for selection and escalation of t-MCS is presented in Fig. 4.

Protocol of selection and escalation of temporary mechanical circulatory support. CAG cardiogenic shock, IABP intra-aortic balloon pumping, ROSC return of spontaneous circulation, VA-ECMO venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, ECPELLA combination of VA-ECMO and Impella, LVEF left ventricular ejection fraction, LVEDP left ventricular end-diastolic pressure, CPO Cardiac power output, PCI percutaneous coronary intervention, PAC pulmonary artery catheter, VT ventricular tachycardia, Vf ventricular fibrillation, sBP systolic blood pressure, mBP mean blood pressure, CCU cardiovascular care unit
Initially, triage of a patient with shock is performed in ER based on pre-hospital information. Then, initial oxygenation therapy and IV therapy are started, together with diagnosis of cardiogenic shock by blood gas, ECG, and Echo (RUSH exam), and evaluation of shock severity and trend. Cardiogenic shock is staged based on SCAI shock classification. For Stage A to C of the SCAI shock classification, volume infusion and intravenous inotropic agents are initiated when there are signs of hypoperfusion such as peripheral coldness, oliguria, and elevation of lactate, along with hypotension findings such as persistent low blood pressure (sBP < 90 mmHg); or intravenous inotropic agents are given to maintain end organ perfusion when blood pressure is normal (sBP > 90 mmHg). Then, if findings of hypoperfusion persist with global LVEF < 30% and increase of LV end-diastolic pressure to > 20 mmHg, initiation of Impella is considered for improvement of hemodynamics. However, initiation of IABP instead of Impella should be considered if the purpose of support is mainly to increase coronary artery blood flow without LV unloading, in patients on strict anticoagulation therapy with high risk of bleeding, or in patients with problem of access for large bore sheaths. For Stage D or E, such as refractory cardiogenic shock with ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation or cardiac arrest requiring CPR, VA-ECMO is the first-line t-MCS to stabilize hemodynamics and improve end organ hypoperfusion. Moreover, in patients with worsening of pulmonary congestion or insufficient aortic valve opening caused by LV afterload from using VA-ECMO, additional LV unloading using Impella or IABP should be considered. After initiation of appropriate t-MCS device, early revascularization with PCI for ACS or ischemic heart disease is performed if indicated, with a target door-to-reperfusion time < 90 min. Finally, before leaving the catheter laboratory, PAC is placed to monitor hemodynamics with the purpose to optimize the volume, catecholamine, and t-MCS using clinical and hemodynamic variables to assist end-organ perfusion.
The management of t-MCS for patients with cardiogenic shock in cardiac care unit (CCU) is primarily based on a comprehensive assessment of clinical, laboratory, imaging, and hemodynamic parameters [43]. Contrary to echocardiogram that has the limitations of providing information for only a single point in time and high susceptibility to interobserver bias, PAC has the ability to monitor serial changes over time and is free from interobserver bias.
Based on evidence on reliable and useful variables for predicting outcome of cardiogenic shock, stratification of patients according to CPO (> or < 0.6 W) and lactate measurements (> or < 4 mg/dL) within 12–24 h is recommended to guide clinical decision such as early device escalation, close observation, or weaning catecholamine and t-MCS [59].
Individual patients have different etiologies and phenotypes of heart failure, and the clinical course after t-MCS induction varies. Improvements in blood pressure, serum lactate level, and end-organ function are indicators of adequate t-MCS support, but are not indicators of cardiac recovery. Clinical parameters that indicate improvement of cardiac performance should be used as weaning criteria. During the t-MCS weaning process, focusing on pulse pressure is essential. PAPi calculated using pulmonary artery pulse pressure is one of the indices used to evaluate RV function [60]. Initiation of t-MCS often leads to the disappearance of pulse pressure, and its reappearance indicates ameliorated cardiac performance. Maintaining adequate t-MCS flow and waiting for spontaneous reappearance of pulse pressure before proceeding to weaning are crucial. Prompt and meticulous attention is indispensable subsequent to the removal of t-MCS devices, because sudden hemodynamic changes may occur. Decannulation of t-MCS device often requires surgical suturing, and recannulation presents challenges. One of the most prudent processes of managing patients undergoing t-MCS is weaning. Therefore, well-defined criteria for deciding to proceed with t-MCS weaning ought to be established. A proposed management protocol for weaning from Impella or ECPELLA is presented in Fig. 5.

Protocol of weaning of temporary mechanical circulatory support. MCS mechanical circulatory support, VA-ECMO venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, ECPELLA combination of VA-ECMO and Impella, LV left ventricular, MAP mean arterial pressure, PAWP pulmonary artery wedge pressure, PA pulmonary artery, RV right ventricular, LV left ventricular, RAP right atrial pressure, PAPi pulmonary artery pulsatility index, VAD ventricular assist device, LVOT-VTI left ventricular outflow tract velocity time integral, CPO cardiac power output
In patients on ECPELLA support, VA-ECMO weaning is usually done first, followed by Impella weaning. The Impella or ECPELLA weaning process entails three steps: first, assessment of whether support is sufficient; second, assessment of right ventricular function; and third, assessment of left ventricular function. In the first step, improvement of end-organ perfusion and intracardiac pressure should be evaluated. Elevated blood pressure, normalization of serum lactate [61], and weaning of pressors/inotropes are valuable indicators of improved end-organ perfusion . Amelioration of intracardiac pressure, which is evaluated using right atrial pressure and PAWP, is also essential. The second step requires meeting the criteria of right atrial pressure < 15 mmHg and PAPi ≥ 1.0 [62]; and if met, a final decision is made to wean from VA-ECMO. Since VA-ECMO reduces RV preload, preserved RV function is essential to wean from VA-ECMO. Although right atrial pressure and PAPi can be used to some extent to assess RV performance for transient changes even under VA-ECMO support, it should be noted that PAPi could be influenced by RV preload. The third step requires meeting the criteria of PAWP < 20 mmHg and CPO ≥ 0.6 watts [63]; and if met, a final decision is made to wean from Impella.
Impella is a percutaneous circulatory support device capable of LV venting and incremental aortic blood flow delivery [64]. Improvement of PAWP and CPO directly indicate hemodynamic effects induced by Impella implantation. Physician should ensure that these indicators do not worsen when the Impella P-level is reduced. Elevated PAWP during the off test has been reported to be associated with unsuccessful weaning in patients with implantable LV assist device [65]. Among echocardiographic parameters, increase of LV outflow tract velocity time integral (LVOT-VTI) has been reported to be an indicator of LV recovery and a criterion to decide weaning from Impella [66]. The final decision to decannulate should be made at minimum VA-ECMO and Impella flows (VA-ECMO: 1–2 L/min, usually 1.5 L/min; and Impella: P-level 2). If the criteria are not met at any stage, the weaning process should not proceed, and intensification of heart failure therapy or device escalation should be considered. The frequency of concomitant significant mitral regurgitation on echocardiography was reported to be higher in patients with higher PAWP or lower CPO at Impella weaning [63]. These patients who are at high risk of Impella weaning failure should be evaluated for severity of concomitant mitral regurgitation, and additional interventions such as surgical or edge-to-edge mitral valve repair may be considered prior to decannulation. There is a paucity of evidence focusing on t-MCS weaning which have been validated in clinical trials, and only expert consensus exists. Verification by large-scale cohort studies is necessary in the future.
Various risk scores have been proposed for the management of cardiogenic shock. Kalra et al. [67] reviewed the cardiogenic shock risk scores by classifying the currently available risk scores into 3 categories: (1) those focused on critically ill patients requiring intensive care; (2) those focused on patients with AMI and cardiogenic shock; and (3) those pertinent to patients with cardiogenic shock who are being sustained by mechanical support devices. Regarding the risk scores for estimation of outcome of patients managed by t-MCS, IABP Shock II risk score [68], SAVE (Survival After Veno-arterial ECMO) score [69], and ENCOURAGE (prEdictioN of Cardiogenic shock OUtcome foR AMI patients salvaGed by VA-ECMO) mortality risk score [70] aim to stratify the risk of hemodynamic instability (Table 1). However, none of these measures are sufficient to comprehensively capture the pathophysiology of cardiogenic shock along the time axis based on recent trends such as the SCAI cardiogenic shock classification, and they also fail to incorporate parameters that may affect the outcome of new t-MCS platforms such as Impella. An ideal risk prediction model should balance the incorporation of key hemodynamic parameters while still allowing dynamic use in multiple scenarios from guiding early decision-making to device weaning. 
Risk scores for management of cardiogenic shock
6 indices: 
① Age > 73 years (1 pt)
② History of stroke (2 pt)
③ BS > 10.6 mmol/L (191 mg/dL) (1 pt)
④ Cre > 132.6 μmol/L (1.5 mg/dL) (1 pt)
⑤ Arterial lac > 5 mmol/L (2 pt)
⑥ TIMI flow grade < 3 after PCI (2 pt)
30-day mortality risk
 Low (0–2) (24%)
 Intermediate (3–4) (49%)
 High (5–9) (77%)
7 indices: 
① Etiology: myocarditis (3 pt), refractory VT/VF (2 pt), post heart/lung transplantation (3 pt), congenital heart disease (− 3 pt)
② Age : 18–38 yr (7 pt), 39–52 yr (4 pt), 53–62 yr (3 pt), ≥ 63yr (0 pt)
③ Weight : < 65kg (1 pt), 65–89 kg (2 pt), ≥ 90 kg (0 pt)
④ Cardiac: pre-ECMO cardiac arrest (− 2 pt), diastolic BP before ECMO ≥ 40 mmHg (3 pt), pulse pressure before ECMO ≤ 20 mmHg (− 2 pt)
⑤ Respiratory: peak inspiratory pressure ≤ 20 cmH2O (3 pt), duration of intubation pre ECMO; ≤ 10 h (0 pt), 11–29 h (−2 pt), ≥ 30h (− 4 pt)
⑥ Renal dysfunction : acute renal failure (− 3 pt), chronic renal failure (− 6 pt), HCO3 pre ECMO ≤ 15 mmol/L (− 3 pt)
⑦ Other organ failure: liver failure (− 3 pt), CNS dysfunction (− 3 pt)
In-hospital survival rate
 Risk I >5 (75%)
 Risk II 1 to 5  (58%)
 Risk III − 4 to 0  (42%)
 Risk IV − 9 to − 5  (30%)
 Risk V ≤ − 10 ( (18%)
7 indices: 
① Age >60 (5 pt) 
② Gender: female (7 pt)
③ BMI > 25 kg/m2 (6 pt)
④ GCS < 6 (6 pt)
⑤ Cre >150 μmol/L or 1.7 mg/dL (5 pt)
⑥ Lac : < 2 mmol/L (0 pt), 2–8 mmol/L (8 pt), > 8 mmol/L (11 pt)
⑦ Reduced prothrombin activity < 50% (5 pt)
1 month survival rate
 0–12  (92%)
 13–18 (70%)
 19–22  (35%)
 23–27  (28%)
 ≥ 28  (17%)
BS blood sugar, Cre creatinine, TIMI thrombolysis in myocardial infarction, ECMO extra corporeal membrane oxygenation, BP blood pressure, CNS central nerve system, BMI body mass index, Lac lactate
This figure was synthesized from the articles on IABP Shock II risk score [68], SAVE (Survival After Veno-arterial ECMO) score [69] and ENCOURAGE (prEdictioN of Cardiogenic shock OUtcome foR AMI patients salvaGed by VA-ECMO) mortality risk score [70]
Management of cardiogenic shock using t-MCS requires seamless treatment from pre-hospital to ER, in the catheter laboratory, and in the cardiovascular intensive care unit. It is essential that the treatment should be carried out efficiently with a coordinated multidisciplinary shock team approach. From this point of view, transfer of patients with refractory cardiogenic shock to centers with appropriate interdisciplinary expertise and adequate patient volume is recommended to ensure optimal outcomes, and community hospitals are encouraged to develop collaborative care models when local resources and expertise are not available [71]. Recent guidelines recommend that developing regional care system integrating MCS-capable hospitals (hubs) and spoke centers with defined protocols for early recognition, treatment, and transfer may improve outcomes of cardiogenic shock patients [72]. Additionally, the guidelines also recommend that acute MCS hospitals should be available to support spoke centers at all times. Potential benefits of standardized care for cardiogenic shock across regional care networks are reported from Maryland, USA [73]. In metropolitan Tokyo, an urban cardiovascular care unit network consisting of hospitals capable of performing emergency PCI at any time is in operation [74], but only approximately 40% of all the hospitals are Impella-certified. In order to improve the quality of care for cardiogenic shock patients in Tokyo, it seems necessary to build a special network applying standardized protocols, including transfer to MCS (including Impella)-capable hospitals. Future development should include building a cardiogenic shock network system with defined protocols based on the background and characteristics of each region.
Within individual hospital systems, adoption of an interdisciplinary shock team may further improve clinical outcomes [75, 76]. The goals of the shock team and collaboration with a centralized cardiogenic shock hub are to streamline care, minimize treatment delays, and centralize advanced heart failure services [77]. The shock team and centralized cardiogenic shock hub also ensure equitable access to high-quality care and opportunities to escalate to t-MCS where appropriate. Tehrani et al. [78] compared in-hospital mortality in patients with no compensated heart failure shock before and after the use of a cardiogenic shock team protocol and found a reduction in mortality from 40 to 28% and improvement in outcomes after using the shock team protocol. A cohort study (National Cardiogenic Shock Initiative) conducted in the United States from 2016 to 2019 at 35 centers also reported in-hospital mortality rate of 28% as a result of treating patients with AMI shock (AMI-cardiogenic shock) using a uniform shock team protocol [59]. This rate compares favorably to in-hospital mortality in the SHOCK trial (53% 1993–1997) [79], the IABP SHOCK trial (60%, 2009–2012) [13], and the CULPRIT-SHOCK trial (49%, 2013–2017) [80], which are previous large cohort studies of treatment of cardiogenic shock associated with AMI.
The basic principle of treatment of patients with shock is to immediately identify the etiology and extent of the shock, maintain adequate tissue perfusion, and provide appropriate management. Improvement of the outcome of cardiogenic shock requires stabilization of hemodynamics and LV unloading using t-MCS based on early identification and staging of shock, in parallel with appropriate treatments of the underlying disease, such as PCI for early revascularization of coronary artery, as well as adjunctive intensive care management. In addition, for the treatment of cardiogenic shock using t-MCS devices, multidisciplinary shock protocols for heart failure management are required, in order not only to save the patient’s life, but also to preserve cardiac function, which may lead to heart recovery.
The comprehensive review was written based on the wealth of experiences gained from the collaboration between the CCM and the CCU in establishing and implementing a shock team protocol. We would like to express our deep gratitude to all the staff members at the Advanced Critical Care Center of Nippon Medical School Hospital.
JN, MM, TY, KS, YI, TU, KA participated in the drafting of the manuscript. All of the authors read and approved the final manuscript.
The authors declare that they have no competing sources of funding.
Data sharing not applicable to this article as no data sets were generated or analyzed during the current study.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Data sharing not applicable to this article as no data sets were generated or analyzed during the current study.
Articles from Journal of Intensive Care are provided here courtesy of BMC

==================================================

Title: Management of cardiogenic shock: a narrative review
Authors: Sofia Ortuno, Nadia Aissaoui, Sarah Benghanem, Stephane Manzo-Silberman, Driss Laghlam, Nadia Bouabdallaoui, Olfa Hamzaoui
Organizations: 
1Research & Innovation Department, RIGHAPH, Service de Réanimation polyvalente, CMC Ambroise Paré-Hartmann, 48 Ter boulevard Victor Hugo, 92200 Neuilly-sur-Seine, France , 
2Service de médecine intensive-réanimation, Hôpital Cochin, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Centre & Université Paris Cité, Paris, France , 
4Service Médecine intensive-réanimation, Hopital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France , 
6Institut de cardiologie de Montreal, Université de Montreal, Montreal, Canada , 
5Université Sorbonne, Paris, France , 
8Service de médecine intensive-réanimation polyvalente, Hôpital Robert Debré, CHU de Reims, Reims, France 
Text:
Cardiogenic shock (CS) is characterized by low cardiac output and sustained tissue hypoperfusion that may result in end-organ dysfunction and death. CS is associated with high short-term mortality, and its management remains challenging despite recent advances in therapeutic options. Timely diagnosis and multidisciplinary team-based management have demonstrated favourable effects on outcomes. We aimed to review evidence-based practices for managing patients with ischemic and non-ischemic CS, detailing the multi-organ supports needed in this critically ill patient population.
Keywords: Cardiogenic shock, Shock, Myocardial infarction, Hemodynamic monitoring, Mechanical ventilation, ECMO
Cardiogenic shock (CS) is a life-threatening syndrome defined by peripheral hypoperfusion and organ dysfunction due to primary cardiac dysfunction. It has several underlying aetiologies, the most common being acute myocardial infarction (AMI). Other less common causes include de novo subtypes of CS (fulminant myocarditis, right ventricular [RV] failure, Takotsubo syndrome, post-partum cardiomyopathy, end-stage valvular heart disease) and acute decompensation of other cardiomyopathies [1].
Despite the many advances in cardiovascular care over the last 20 years, survival of CS patients has not changed substantially and remains around 50% at 30 days following diagnosis [2].
In this review, we aimed to address several aspects of CS, highlighting the importance of understanding CS’s pathophysiology and phenotypes to improve the management of these critically ill patients admitted to the intensive care units (ICU).
CS is defined as clinical and biological evidence of tissue hypoperfusion secondary to cardiac dysfunction [3]. Although the clinical definition of CS varies, it usually includes hypotension (systolic blood pressure ≤ 90 mmHg) despite adequate filling pressures, and signs of organ hypoperfusion. Most of definitions and classifications have centered on AMI-CS. However, the use of "one size fits all" definitions does not account for the CS hemodynamic phenotypes which can vary from those with myocardial dysfunction due to ischemia requiring minimal vasopressor support to CS with ongoing cardiac arrest. Accordingly, the relatively new classification of the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions (SCAI) describes five evolutive stages of CS, from A (preshock, i.e., a patient at risk but with no obvious signs of hypoperfusion) to E (extremis, i.e., refractory circulatory collapse) attempting to better describe the different levels of CS severity Fig. 1a [3]. This classification has been validated in a large cohort of unselected cardiac ICU patients, showing a strong association between SCAI shock stages and mortality, even after adjustment for known predictors of mortality [4]. A second classification focusing on hemodynamic parameters classifies patient into four separates states according to their status volume and their peripheral circulation Fig. 1c [5]. Using this hemodynamic classification and by better characterizing each patient’s “tissue response” to decreased perfusion and the subsequent evolution of specific clinical disease pathways, some authors rationalized that earlier and more specific interventions could be employed to improve CS survival rates [6]. Another classification based on three different phenotypes has been proposed (I-Not congested, II-cardiorenal, and III-cardiometabolic), Fig. 1b [7]. In detail, the non-congested phenotype (I) exhibits lower heart rate, normal filling pressures (right atrial and pulmonary capillary wedge pressures), and a higher blood pressure relative to the other phenotypes, representing a relatively stable profile of a non-congested patient with CS. On the other hand, patients in the cardiorenal shock (II) group are older, with multiple comorbidities. They exhibit a lower heart rate, elevated pulmonary arterial and pulmonary capillary wedge pressures, as well as lower glomerular filtration rate, suggesting renal involvement from shock. Finally, the patients in the cardiometabolic shock (III) group have elevated lactate, alanine aminotransferase, serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen levels, heart rate, and right atrial pressure, along with low blood pressure, cardiac power output, and index. This suggests multiorgan involvement, featured by increased serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen levels, transaminases and lactic acidosis in a patient with CS. This classification highlights that CS begins with hemodynamic compromise that triggers impairment of renal and liver function progressively leading to a self-perpetuating “cardiometabolic” shock phenotype causing a further downward spiral.

Classifications of cardiogenic shock. A SCAI classification. B Phenotypic classification: Three different phenotypes are proposed (I-Not congested, II-cardiorenal, and III-cardiometabolic). C Hemodynamic classification: CI, cardiac index; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; and SVRI, systemic vascular resistance index
CS involves several pathophysiologic mechanisms that may have consequences for clinical management. Thus, one has to differentiate de novo or acute cardiac conditions leading to CS and CS related to acute-on- chronic heart failure [8]. De novo CS are mainly due to acute MI (AMI), unstable angina, postcardiotomy syndrome, valvular heart disease, myocardial disease (such as myocarditis), stress-induced cardiomyopathy, sepsis-induced cardiomyopathy, pericardial tamponade, congenital lesions, or/and mechanical injury to the heart. Many triggers lead to acute decompensation of chronic cardiac failure and lead to CS.
Cardiogenic shock arises from an imbalance between input and demand, causing systemic hypoperfusion and organ dysfunction [5, 9–11]. This leads to microcirculatory changes, inflammatory activation, anaerobic metabolism, and oxidative stress, resulting in altered oxygen delivery and microvascular dysfunction that contribute to end-organ dysfunction [12–14].
Distinguishing between acute CS and acute-on-chronic CS is essential because mortality is higher in acute CS [15–17]. It also seems interesting to assess the different haemodynamic profiles in both entities, as this may help to tailor therapies [6, 15].
In acute CS, there is a sudden reduction in ventricular contractility, leading to decreases in stroke volume, CO and blood pressure and increases in pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and central venous pressure. Consequently to systemic hypoperfusion, organ compensatory mechanisms are triggered to restore CO and peripheral perfusion. Among the compensatory homeostatic responses to a drop in CO, the most well-recognized are activation of the sympathetic nervous system and the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system, secondary to low mean blood pressure and decrease in renal blood flow, respectively. These mechanisms lead to fluid reabsorption and systemic vasoconstriction, increasing volume overload and ventricular afterload and worsening myocardial contractility [5, 11].
Acute-on-chronic heart failure evolves from an initial hemodynamic disturbance into a multisystem disorder. Arterial vasoconstriction secondary to activation of the baroceptors and chemoreceptors increases vascular resistance to peripheral organs and redistributes blood away from the splanchnic circulation. Moreover, venoconstriction increases stressed blood volume resulting in significant increases in central venous pressures in the presence of right ventricular (RV) failure and a variable response in pulmonary venous pressures depending on LV function. Congestion in the setting of CS is also associated with organ dysfunction and poor prognosis; and may be challenging to manage [18]. Indeed, progressive elevations in central venous pressures lead to visceral venous congestion and end-perfusion organ (e.g., kidney and liver) dysfunction. Chronic heart failure progresses to CS when impaired ventricular contractility is severe enough to cause a critical reduction in cardiac output (CO). This reduction of CO may be due to an increase in demand because of a triggering factor or to the natural progression of the disease with a progressive reduction in cardiac output. End organ hypoperfusion results in acute-on-chronic hepatic and renal insults, lactic acidemia, decreased coronary perfusion pressure, and further activation of mechanoreceptors and chemoreceptors, all of which cause a vicious circle of worsening cardiac function [8].
Most epidemiological data on shock in critically ill patients focus on severe sepsis and septic shock, which are thought to be the leading causes of mortality in these patients. Although less frequent, cardiogenic shock (CS) remains a genuine clinical challenge with similar or even higher mortality rates [19–21]. Overall, CS patients seem to represent 7–10% of patients admitted to ICU [20]. However, the prevalence of CS is variable according to the type ICU in which patients are being treated and is higher in cardiac ICUS compared to general ICUs.
Data regarding CS epidemiology are predominantly derived from large registries of patients with CS secondary to AMI (AMI-CS). In three nationwide French registries from 2005 to the end of 2015 assessing 9951 patients with AMI, the prevalence of CS has markedly decreased, both for primary (those with CS on admission) and secondary CS (those who developed CS subsequently during hospitalization), so that CS has become an infrequent complication of AMI (2.8%). However, 1-year mortality in patients who developed CS remained exceptionally high (58%) [1].
There are limited datasets that have incorporated CS across all its etiologies; therefore, comparison of outcomes between AMI and non-AMI-CS is still challenging. Data from a French registry suggest that patients with non-AMI-CS may have comparatively better survival rates (36% vs. 31%) [20]. Regarding the effect of cardiac comorbidity, patients with acute cardiac failure tend to have more severe shock presentations, higher lactate levels, and higher Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) scores, even if they are less comorbid and have fewer cardio-vascular risk factors than those with CS due to acute-on-chronic heart failure [16, 22]. Consequently, in-hospital mortality appears to be higher in de novo cardiac dysfunction compared to acute-on-chronic heart failure-CS [16, 17]. Intensivists should thus pay attention on such acute cardiac conditions, as it seems to be a strong marker of mortality.
The approach to manage CS patients should be multimodal. It includes assessment of severity and early determination of the etiology with clinical examination and non-invasive exploration (clinical ECG, biological and echocardiographic tests). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is the most useful diagnostic modality in this setting, due to its ability to provide comprehensive information about cardiac structure and function, promptly, safely, and at the patient’s bedside. It allows to assess biventricular function, valvular pathology, pericardial effusion, left and right ventricular filling pressure and hemodynamic assessment. Moreover, early comprehensive TTE can provide important prognostic insights in CS patients [23–26]. The invasive hemodynamic assessment may be required to assess response to treatment and for continuous monitoring of cardiovascular function, especially when there is insufficient clinical improvement to initial treatment maneuvers (See Fig. 2). Management of CS requires close collaboration between cardiologists and intensivists, with multidisciplinary discussion and early admission to intensive care.

Assessment and diagnosis algorithm for CS early management. Abbreviations: BiV, biventricular dysfunction; CI, cardiac index; CS, cardiogenic shock; ECG, electrocardiogram; LV, left ventricular; RV, right ventricular; SBP, systolic blood pressure
Current guidelines emphasize the initiation of early (within the first few hours) basic monitoring that should be supplemented by advanced monitoring in more complicated cases and in refractory shock [27, 28]. Indeed, during the first hours of CS management, evaluation of organ dysfunction by physical examination (looking for cool extremities, mottling [29], oliguria < 30 mL/h, abdominal pain and signs of encephalopathy), biological tests (including lactate) and echocardiography, as well as invasive arterial pressure measurement allow the early recognition, better classification and precise phenotyping of CS providing robust mortality risk stratification in this population [4, 30, 31].
Lactate level (pathologic threshold > 2 mmol/L) monitoring should be measured on admission and repeated every 1–4 h based on clinical conditions in the early stage of CS management [5, 34, 35]. Elevated lactate level is associated with an increased risk of mortality [36–38]. Conversely, complete lactate clearance is an independent predictor of in-hospital survival as early as 8 h after enrollment in a sub-analysis of DOREMI-trial [39].
TTE is one of the most useful basic monitoring modality in CS patients, due to its accuracy to determine CO and CI with good correlation with pulmonary artery catheters (PAC) data [32, 33]. It also allows to determine left and right ventricular filling pressure (even if several limits exist), pulmonary artery systolic pressure and systemic vascular resistance [33]. On the other hand, trans-oesophageal echocardiography is not the first line of monitoring in these unstable patients. It should be performed under optimal safety conditions, under sedation and by an expert of the technique. Of note, among advanced monitoring modalities, transpulmonary thermodilution technique may be used to directly estimate LV systolic function when TTE is not immediately available [27].
In addition to this standard/basic monitoring, parameters derived from central venous catheter (in the superior vena cava territory) may be also helpful in severe patients: the central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO2), which reflects balance between supply and consumption, and the veno-arterial difference in CO2 tension [“ΔPCO2” or “PCO2 gap”, elevated > 6 mmHg)] a surrogate of the cardiac output because it reflects the balance between CO2 production and CO2 delivery to the lungs [30, 40]. No specific threshold is reported in current guidelines but goal is increasing of ScvO2 values with serial evaluation (every 4 h) after treatment initiation [5, 31].
Besides, in the most severe patients, PAC could be discussed. It is important to note that the insertion and management of PAC must be carried out by experts, which reinforces the need to transfer patients to an expert CS centre. PAC directly measure pulmonary and cardiac pressures as well as central oxygen saturation (SVO2) and are used to calculate an array of hemodynamic parameters including: cardiac output (CO, L/min) and cardiac index (CI, L/min/m2), cardiac power output (Watts, calculated as mean arterial pressure × cardiac output/451) [41], pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP, elevated > 18 mmHg), right atrial pressure (RAP, elevated > 12 mmHg), mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mmHg and pulmonary artery pulsatility index (PAPi) (ratio of the pulmonary artery pulse pressure to right atrial pressure, predictor of right ventricular failure) [42]. Based on these parameters, physicians can have complete hemodynamic evaluation and categorize CS patients into RV and/or LV dysfunction, right-sided (elevated RAP) congestion, left-sided (elevated PCWP) congestion, bi-sided (both RAP and PCWP elevated) congestion, or euvolemic status (both RAP and PCWP below cutoff values) [15, 43, 44]. An increasing number of studies report the use of PAC and its association with CS prognosis improvement [43, 45, 46]. In this regard, recent guidelines recommend invasive hemodynamic assessment for continuous hemodynamic monitoring in the acute management of patients receiving therapy with MCS, to guide its withdrawal and to supervise the pharmacologic support in patients with myocardial recovery from CS [5, 47]. Finally, in patients without recovery of myocardial and end-organ function, advanced/invasive hemodynamic monitoring is useful to assess candidacy for and/or transition to advanced heart failure therapies, including durable mechanical circulatory support and heart transplantation [5, 47].
Figure 3 summarises the management of cardiogenic shock.

Cardiogenic shock management. Abbreviations: AV ECMO, arteriovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; HR, heart rate; LV, left ventricular; RV, right ventricular
The cornerstone of treatment that improved CS prognosis in AMI patients is emergent coronary revascularization (or Percutaneous Coronary Intervention PCI) in patients with coronary artery disease [48]. The SHOCK trial highlighted that early revascularization in AMI-CS significantly decreased 6 months (50 vs. 63%, p = 0.027) and long-term mortality compared with intensive medical treatment [49]. The benefit of an initial revascularization strategy was confirmed in a nationwide cohort study including 60,833 patients, showing a significant reduction in mortality compared with a conservative strategy. This improvement appears in all patient subgroups, including the elderly [50]. These studies confirmed the need for an initial invasive management approach in case of AMI-CS. Although its implementation reduces the incidence of CS in myocardial infarction [51], fibrinolysis is ineffective once shock has set in, due to reduced penetration into thrombus as there is a decrease in blood pressure. In this regard, fibrinolysis should be reserved in very selected patient for whom timely percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is not feasible [52]. Thus, primary PCI is recommended as first-line therapy (IB level) according to ESC guidelines [52] (Fig. 3).
Another question of interest in AMI-CS was the strategy of revascularization in multivessel coronary artery disease (MVD). Indeed, up to 85% of AMI-CS patients present multivessel or left main coronary artery disease at the diagnostic time, MVD being associated with higher mortality compared to single-vessel disease [53]. Despite this, optimal management and timing of revascularization for non–infarct-related artery lesions in AMI-CS remains unclear. For decades ESC guidelines encouraged immediate multivessel percutaneous coronary intervention (MV-PCI) of all high-grade lesions, in addition to the culprit lesion with a class IIa C recommendation [52]. However, despite an appealing pathophysiological rationale, this approach was not supported by robust evidence [53, 54]. The debate seemed to be closed thanks to the recent and large randomized, multicenter Culprit Lesion Only PCI versus Multivessel PCI in Cardiogenic Shock (CULPRIT-SHOCK) [55]. Indeed, this trial showed a significant clinical benefit of a culprit-lesion-only strategy versus MV-PCI at early stage of CS with a reduction in the combined primary endpoint of 30-day mortality or severe renal failure requiring renal replacement therapy (45.9% vs. 55.4%; RR 0.83; 95% IC: 0.71–0.96; p = 0.01). Moreover, the culprit only strategy also provided an absolute 8.2% reduction in 30-day mortality (43.3% vs. 51.5%; RR 0.84; 95% IC 0.72–0.98, p = 0.03). These results were consistent across all predefined subgroups and were confirmed by a meta-analysis [56].
When patients at early stages of CS present non-revascularizable lesions by PCI and/or mechanical complications, there is a role for emergent coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). In the IABP-Shock 2 study, 70% of patients with AMI-CS presented with MVD but only 4% underwent emergent CABG [57]. Few studies have addressed the issue of the benefit of surgical revascularization. Among them, few supported this strategy. Only observational data suggest that PCI and coronary artery bypass grafting could be similar in terms of mortality in AMI-CS [58] or even that CABG could confer better outcomes with the potential bias of patient selection [59]. Of note, improvements and better control of PCI techniques have led to decreased CABG indications.
To conclude, emergent revascularization in patients with coronary artery disease of culprit-lesion-only is the main treatment that improved CS prognosis. The question of the optimal timing of further revascularisation in patients with MVD who have undergone PCI of the infarct-related artery remains open.
Patients with CS have a high prevalence of arrhythmias and conduction disorders. The reported incidence of atrial fibrillation (AF) is as high as 20%, episodes of ventricular fibrillation occur in 9–19% of patients with CS [1]. In addition, 4.5–21% of patients will develop atrioventricular block [1] and 4.5% will require pacemaker implantation during hospitalization for CS [19]. No specific recommendations exist regarding supra-ventricular arrythmia management in CS. In patients with cardiogenic shock and arrhythmia, restoration of sinus rhythm, or slowing heart rate if restoration fails, can be useful to improve hemodynamic parameters. Thus, recent AHA Guidelines on acute AF management argue for immediate restoration of sinus rhythm in critically ill patients if AF is causing hemodynamic compromise. If the hemodynamic situation is stabilized, both rate and rhythm control are feasible [60]. As for the choice of pharmacological treatment, amiodarone has demonstrated its efficacy for pharmacological cardioversion in this population and seems to be the drug of choice in critically ill patients [61]. Of note, the paradigm of safe reduction within 48 h without anticoagulation has recently been challenged because recent data support an increased thromboembolic risk of AF reduction beyond 12 h of onset [62], this risk being correlated with the CHA2DS2-VASC score [63, 64].
The management of high-degree conduction disorders is not specific to patients with CS. For patients with sinus node dysfunction, second-degree or third-degree atrioventricular block associated with symptoms or hemodynamic compromise, atropine as a first line is reasonable to improve atrioventricular conduction, increase ventricular rate, and improve hemodynamic parameters (Class IIa recommandations). Furthermore, in patients with symptoms or hemodynamic compromise and who have low likelihood for coronary ischemia, beta-adrenergic agonists, such as isoproterenol, dopamine, dobutamine, or epinephrine, may be considered (Class IIb recommendation). When the high-grade conduction disorder is refractory to medical therapy, temporary transvenous pacing is reasonable (Class IIa recommendation) [65].
In patients with intraventricular conduction disorders, ventricular resynchronization can be considered in selected patients but only few reports describe its utilization in CS [66, 67]. In a single-center German study in 15 CS patients with left-bundle branch block, temporary resynchronization of the left ventricle using a lead placed in the coronary sinus optimized hemodynamic parameters and led to reduced blood-lactate plasmatic levels [68]. Of note, ESC Guidelines did not provide any recommendations on cardiac resynchronization therapy in a CS setting [34].
Finally, electrical storm is a life-threatening condition characterized by recurrent ventricular arrhythmia. A classical clinical definition of electrical storm is three or more sustained ventricular arrhythmia episodes (including appropriate ICD shocks) separated by at least 5 min over 24 h. The management of rhythmic storms should always include a cardiologist and must take several factors into account, namely the presence of underlying pro-arrhythmogenic cardiopathy, previously known left ventricular function, the presence of an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator and hemodynamic tolerance. In addition, the search for a myocardial ischemia substrate must be systematic [69]. In CS patients (i.e., with hemodynamically unstable ventricular arrhythmia), immediate electrical cardioversion is always preferred for patients and is appropriate for hemodynamically stable VT when the risk of sedation is low. IV Amiodarone is recommended as the first-line anti-arrhythmic therapy in electrical storm caused by structural heart disease in the absence of QT prolongation or Torsade de pointe, because of its greater efficacy for preventing recurrent VT and suppressing VT refractory to other anti-arrhythmic therapy. The recommended dose is a bolus og 300 mg (max 5 mg/kg) over 20 min then repeat 150 mg bolus over 10 min for recurrent ventricular arrhythmia, then Infusion 1 mg/min until free from ventricular arrhythmia ≥ 6 h (may continue for longer) and continue 0.5 mg/min until electrical storm resolves. When amiodarone is ineffective as monotherapy or for higher-risk presentations, lidocaine is often added as a second-line therapy during further amiodarone loading [initial bolus of 1–1.5 mg/kg (max 100–120 mg)]. Of note, lidocaine is more effective on an ischemic myocardium but can accumulate during decompensated heart failure or CS [70]. Otherwise, specific electrical storm etiologies and cardiomyopathies justify specific management, such as isoprenaline for Torsade de Pointe or Brugada syndrome and betablockers for Long QT syndrome.
Deep sedation and intubation is a very effective treatment of electrical storm [71] and is recommended in patients with an intractable electrical storm refractory to drug treatment (ClassIIa Recommandation, LOE, C). Moreover, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator interrogation is crucial to check frequency, effectiveness, and appropriateness of device therapies. Radiofrequency ablation as sympatholysis by stellar ganglion blockade and/or definite sympathectomy (by surgery or stereotaxic radiotherapy) should be considered in patients with recurrent episodes of ventricular arrythmia nonresponsive to medical treatment or coronary revascularization (ClassIIa Recommandation, LOE, C) [70, 72]. Finally, in eligible patients, heart transplantation may be considered with aMCS [73, 74].
The optimal management of severe valvular disease is challenging in CS patients because of the limited number of studies available. Several mechanisms may contribute to CS in the setting of decompensated valvular disease, and initial stabilization is recommended before evaluation for corrective surgery [75]. Cardiac surgery remains the gold-standard treatment in the management of symptomatic valvular disease but its invasiveness is associated with high mortality leading to consider alternative therapies such as percutaneous management. The role of percutaneous interventional management of valvular heart disease is increasing in CS patients as more and more data report its safety and good results in this severe population.
However, it is important to remember that in case of valvular deterioration due to endocarditis complicated by cardiogenic shock, surgery remains the cornerstone [76, 77].
In detail, in decompensated severe aortic stenosis, current guidelines are very elusive but keep a place for urgent valvuloplasty as a bridge to transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) or surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) [56, 57]. When aortic valvuloplasty is performed, the 1-year mortality remains dramatically high around 70% [78] while TAVR in CS patient is actually associated with 7.9–33% 1-month mortality [79–83]. A recent large observational real-world study by Goel et al. showed that adjusted 1-year mortality of TAVR was significantly higher at 29.7% in the CS group compared to 22.6% in the non-CS group (HR, 1.57; 95% CI 1.43–1.72; p < 0.001). However, patients who survived the first 30 days after TAVR had similar mortality rates to those who were not in CS [83].
Management of aortic insufficiency may include atrial pacing to increase heart rate and shorten diastole duration. SAVR is considered as the gold standard despite lack of data, but TAVR should be considered in selected patients [84].
In mitral regurgitation with CS, surgery is indicated for primary mitral disease but no evidence supports the benefit of surgery in secondary mitral regurgitation leaving a place for percutaneous approaches to the mitral valve [85–87]. In a large observational study, Simard and colleagues reported that transcatheter edge-to-edge mitral valve repair in patients with CS was feasible with excellent device success rate [in 3249 patients (85.6%)] with successful achievement of final mitral regurgitation grade ≤ 2 + in 88.2% of case [87]. Finally, severe mitral stenosis may be treated by percutaneous mitral valvuloplasty when surgery is not feasible [88, 89].
In summary, the indications for cardiac surgery in case of CS due to acute valvular disease should be personalized. In all cases, it seems important to discuss with experts and trained teams in a multidisciplinary approach (i.e., cardiologists, cardiac surgeons and intensivists). When medical treatment is the first-line choice, it also seems important to re-evaluate the interventional or surgical indication according to the evolution of CS and to reconsider the indication before the occurrence of refractory CS despite optimization of pharmacological treatment.
In patients with acute CS with hypotension, early vasopressors are recommended to increase perfusion pressure of the vital organs [27, 34, 35]. Most often in patients with acute-on chronic CS but also in the acute CS, inotropes are recommended to manage patients with hypotension and persistent low CO due to decreased LV systolic function, resulting in poor vital organ perfusion [27, 34, 35]. Most existing inotropes used in CS exert their physiological effects through the modulation of cardiomyocyte calcium flow inducing tachycardia. Thus, these drugs can increase myocardial oxygen consumption. These agents should be used with progressive titration at the lowest possible dose for the shortest duration. Relevant effects and mechanism of action of inotropes and vasopressors in CS setting are presented in Table 1.
Inotropes and vasopressors use in cardiogenic shock
Moreover, the target mean blood pressure in CS is not well defined. Current recommendations are based on evidence in septic shock patients, suggesting that 65 mm Hg seems to be sufficient [27]. In CS, data are conflicting regarding the benefit of targeting a mean blood pressure higher than 65 mmHg [90–93].
During the last two decades, several studies have compared different regimens of vasopressors and inotropes, the most relevant of which are detailed below.
In the SOAP II trial, De Backer et al. evaluated the effects of two different regimens of first-line vasopressors in patients with shock and included a prespecified CS subgroup. Compared to norepinephrine, dopamine was associated with a higher rate of arrhythmias in the CS subgroup (280 patients) and in the overall population (1679 patients) and was associated with a higher risk of mortality in the CS subgroup [94]. The only randomized study (OPTIMA study) comparing, norepinephrine to epinephrine, reported the same hemodynamic efficacy with similar effects on arterial pressure and cardiac index, but epinephrine was associated with more arrhythmias, increased heart rates and lactic acidosis [95]. Furthermore, the OPTIMA study was stopped prematurely because of an increased incidence of refractory shock in CS patients receiving epinephrine [10 of 27 (37%) vs. 2 of 30 (7%); p = 0.008]. Finally, a meta-analysis including individual data from 2583 cardiogenic shock patients, among whom 37% (IQR 17–76%) received epinephrine, reported a three-fold increase in the risk of death with epinephrine (OR = 3.3 [2.8–3.9]) compared to other drugs [96]. In addition, in cardiac arrest patients with post-resuscitation shock, all-cause hospital mortality was found to be significantly higher when epinephrine was used (OR 2.6; 95% CI 1.4–4.7; p = 0.002) compared to norepinephrine. Cardiovascular hospital mortality was also higher with epinephrine (aOR = 5.5; 95% CI 3.0–10.3; p < 0.001) [97]. Given these data, norepinephrine is currently recommended as first-line vasopressor in CS [27, 34, 35].
Among intravenous inotropes, dobutamine, is recommended to improve myocardial contractility and cardiac output [IIb class recommendations] [34, 35]. In a pilot study on thirty patients, dobutamine resulted in less arrhythmia, less myocardial oxygen consumption, and a lower increase in lactate concentration compared with epinephrine [98]. Other inotropes that do not use the beta adrenergic receptor stimulation way (phosphodiesterase-3 inhibitors and levosimendan), have been assessed in CS patients because of their ability to improve myocardial contractility and their vasodilatory effect on pulmonary artery without increasing myocardial oxygen consumption. Milrinone (half life time of 2 h) decreases the rate of intracellular cyclic adenosine mono-phosphate breakdown, which increases intracellular calcium, myocardial contractility, and cardiomyocyte relaxation. A randomized study (DOREMI trial) on 192 participants (96 in each group), had recently compared milrinone with dobutamine in the management of CS. The primary composite outcome (in-hospital death, resuscitated cardiac arrest, receipt of cardiac transplant or mechanical circulatory support, nonfatal myocardial infarction, stroke or initiation of renal replacement therapy) did not differ between the milrinone [47 of 96 (49%)] and dobutamine group [52 of 96 (54%); relative risk, 0.90; 95% CI (0.69–1.19); p = 0.47]. Furthermore, no significant differences were found in heart rate, mean arterial pressure, serum lactate level, hourly urine output or serum creatinine level between the treatment groups [99].
Levosimendan seemed promising because it improves myocardial contractility by increasing myofilament calcium sensitivity, without raising intracellular calcium and AMP concentrations. However few data support its use in CS and they suffer from important methodologic bias. In the SURVIVE Study, 1227 patients suffering from acute-on-chronic CS were randomized to rceive either intravenous levosimendan (n = 664) or intravenous dobutamine (n = 663). No difference was found regarding all-cause mortality at 180 days. There were higher incidences of atrial fibrillation, hypokalemia, and headache in the levosimendan group [100]. A systematic Cochrane database review found that levosimendan compared to dobutamine did not reduce short-term mortality (RR = 0.60, 95% CI 0.36–1.03; participants = 1701; low-quality evidence) and long-term mortality (RR = 0.84, 95% CI 0.63–1.13; participants = 1591; low-quality evidence); and did not reduce long-term mortality versus placebo (long-term mortality: RR 0.55, 95% CI 0.16–1.90; participants = 55; very low-quality evidence, no data on short-term mortality) [101]. Other studies reported a possible increased risk of complications including adverse cardiovascular events and excessive peripheral vasodilatation with hypotension [102]. A meta-analysis assessing data from 5,480 patients in 45 randomized clinical trials reported a benefit of levosimendan on mortality (risk ratio = 0.80 [0.72; 0.89], p for effect < 0.001). However, in this meta-analysis, trials on patients with acute cardiac events were combined with trials on patients undergoing elective cardiac surgery [103]. Of note, Levosimendan may be useful in CS patients on chronic beta-blocker treatment. In a subgroup analysis from the SURVIVE study in patients who used beta-blockers (n = 669), mortality was significantly lower for levosimendan than dobutamine at day 5 (1.5 vs. 5.1% deaths; HR = 0.29; (0.11–0.78), p = 0.01) [104].
The incidence of acute respiratory failure (ARF) in CS patients ranges between 50 and 88% with more than 80% of patients with CS requiring respiratory support [19, 20]. Cardiogenic pulmonary edema is backward failure due to LV systolic and diastolic dysfunction [105]. This excess of interstitial and alveoli fluids impairs ventilation; and increases work of breathing, which ultimately results in both hypoxemia and hypercapnia.
In addition, intrapleural pressure (Ppleural) seems to be a major determinant of respiratory impairment. During respiratory failure, active respiratory muscles contraction induces a negative Ppleural, increasing venous return and RV/LV preload [106]. Other factors contribute to a further impairment in gas exchange. Indeed the concurrent inflammatory response conduces to the development of alveolar edema by changing vascular membrane permeability; while acute kidney injury favors fluid retention [105]. The compensatory increase in respiratory drive in response to hypoxia, hypercapnia and/or metabolic acidosis, can further redirect cardiac output toward respiratory muscles, perpetuating myocardial ischemia and tissue hypoperfusion in CS patients [107].
These pathophysiological concepts support the use of ventilatory support with positive pressure ventilation (PPV) for management of CS patients with respiratory distress [106]. The first aim of the ventilatory support with PPV is to improve gas exchanges (i.e., oxygenation and decarboxylation) as it reduces alveolo-interstitial edema and enhances alveolar recruitment [108, 109]. It leads to a better systemic and myocardial oxygenation and reversion of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction. PPV decreases myocardial oxygen demand by decreasing the myocardial wall tension (Laplace law). In addition, PPV also decreases work-of-breathing and reduces the oxygen consumption of the diaphragm. Finally, PPV leads to favorable hemodynamic effects by reducing RV/LV preload and LV afterload and therefore improves CO [107, 110].
Modalities of different respiratory supports use in cardiogenic shock are displayed in Table 2. Data regarding respiratory management of acute cardiogenic pulmonary oedema came from studies that were not dedicated to cardiogenic shock. In a large multicentric randomized study comparing oxygen therapy versus noninvasive ventilation in acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema, PPV induced a faster improvement of respiratory distress and acidosis. There was no significant difference in mortality or intubation within 7 days. However, these results suffer from limitations regarding the low intubation and mortality rate [109]. Recent studies also suggested that PPV with noninvasive ventilation reduced the risk of invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV) [111–113].
Modalities, settings, advantages, limits and indications of the different respiratory supports used in cardiogenic shock
Avoid hypoxia
Simple and accessible device
No PEEP effect
Limited oxygen flow at 15 L/min
First-line support until NIV or IMV in case of respiratory failure
Acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema: compared to oxygenotherapy, PEEP induced a faster improvement of respiratory distress and acidosis without significant difference in mortality or intubation within 7 days [109]
No data regarding CS specifically
Non invasive ventilation (NIV)
 Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
 Bilevel positive air pressure (BIPAP)
Positive Pressure ventilation (PPV) with positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP): minimal starting setting at 5–10 cmH2O, adjust according to SaO2
In case of BIPAP, adjust inspiratory positive airway pressure according to respiratory rate
FiO2: adjust with objective of SaO2 92–98% [106]
Need correct selection of interfaces, favorable patient/ventilator synchrony, comfort and active participation of the patient
1. Respiratory effects:
 Reduced alveolo-interstitial edema
 Induced alveolar recruitment
 Improve oxygenation: reversion of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, better systemic and myocardial oxygenation
 Improve decarboxylation
 Decreasing work-of-breathing and reduce the oxygen consumption of the diaphragm
2. Hemodynamic effects
 Reduce RV/LV preload and LV afterload
 Improve cardiac output
Could reduce the risk of invasive mechanical ventilation [111–113]
Simple and accessible device
Absolute contraindications:
 Severely impaired consciousness
 Refractory vomiting
 Facial trauma
 Hemodynamic instability
Relative contraindications:
 Inability to cough
 Uncooperative patient
NIV compared to IMV in a non-randomized study: no difference of mortality [115]
First line: respiratory distress in heart failure patients, without absolute contraindications to NIV [5, 34, 35, 106]
Second line: should be considered in CS only after:
 Hemodynamic stabilization
 An assessment of the risk–benefit balance
 Without absolute contraindications to NIV
 With a close monitoring of efficacity
Device: BIPAP increase Vt and could be preferable compared to CPAP in case of hypercapnia, chronic lung disease or severe RF
FiO2: adjust with objective of SaO2 92–98% [106]
PEEP: set at 5 cmH2O, gradually increased according to respiratory (overdistension, barotrauma) and hemodynamic (decrease RV preload and increase RV afterload) risks of excessive PEEP
Respiratory rate: adjust to limit hypercapnia acidosis (worsening of RV dysfunction risk)
Vt: should not exceed 6–8 mL/kg of ideal body weight
No data and recommendations regarding superiority of any specific mode (volume or pressure control) [5, 34, 35, 106]
1. Respiratory effects:
 Reduced alveolo-interstitial edema
 Induced alveolar recruitment
 Improve oxygenation: reversion of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, better systemic and myocardial oxygenation
 Improve decarboxylation
 Decreasing work-of-breathing and reduce the oxygen consumption of the diaphragm
2. Hemodynamic effects:
 Reduce RV/LV preload and LV afterload
 Improve cardiac output
Sedation use: could reduce oxygen consumption and improve cardiac output
Risks associated with anaesthesia induction and intubation: hypotension, hypoxia, transient low cardiac output due to intrathoracic pressures change, cardiac arrest
Specific mode: pressure supported ventilation (PSV) could increase myocardial oxygen consumption if spontaneous breath is no fully supported [122]
First line: [5, 34, 35, 106]
 Refractory shock with severe hypotension
 Need for effective airway protection due to coma/impairment of consciousness
 Refractory vomiting
 Facial trauma
Second line after NIV failure [5, 34, 35, 106]
High oxygen flow (max 60L/min, FIO2 1)
Improvement of oxygenation
Simple and accessible device
Scarce data
Remains actually unclear [119, 120]
BIPAP, bilevel positive air pressure; CS, cardiogenic shock; CPAP, Continuous positive airway pressure; PPV, Positive Pressure ventilation; NIV, Noninvasive ventilation; PEEP, positive end expiratory pressure; RV, right ventricular; LV, left ventricular; Vt, tidal volume; PSV, pressure supported ventilation
NIV represents a cornerstone in the management of cardiogenic pulmonary edema but its place in CS management is more questionable, mainly due to the hemodynamic instability or consciousness impairment. Importantly, there is no randomized study that compared NIV with IMV in this population. Recent European Guidelines regarding the management of respiratory distress in heart failure patients suggested to use NIV before intubation but do not address specifically the issue of CS patients [114]. The expected benefit of IMV is the reduction of oxygen consumption by sedation, allowing the optimization of CO [105]. One observational study including 219 CS patients compared NIV with IMV and highlighted no difference of mortality after propensity score adjustment [115]. These data suggest to consider NIV with caution after assessment of the risk–benefit balance. Refractory shock with severe hypotension and the need for effective airway protection due to coma are absolute contraindications to NIV. In addition, mild hypotension, inability to expectorate copious secretions, uncooperative patient and isolated RV failure should be considered as relative contraindications [108]. In consequence, the use of NIV should be considered only after hemodynamic stabilization with a close monitoring of its efficacy, that is usually observed within 1–2 h from its initiation [105, 114]. Overall, success of NIV is conditioned by correct selection of interfaces, favorable patient/ventilator synchrony, comfort and active participation of the patient [116].
In practice, two main modalities of NIV are used in ICU, i.e., continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and bilevel positive air pressure (BIPAP) with positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP). Minimal starting setting of PPV should be 5–10 cmH2O, adjusted according to oxygen saturation (SaO2). Actually, CPAP and BiPAP can be used indifferently, depending on the practice of the centers, in the absence of demonstrated difference in mortality and intubation rates [109, 117]. Although CPAP is a simpler technique, BIPAP could increase tidal volume and seems to be preferable in patients with hypercapnia, chronic lung disease or severe respiratory failure. Finally, high flow nasal canula shows improvement of oxygenation, providing an inconstant PEEP “effect” between 5 and 7 cmH2O [118]. Considering the paucity of data in the respiratory management of CS, the place of this device remains actually unclear [119, 120].
When IMV is needed, patients with cardiogenic shock should benefit from early intubation. A recent study highlighted that each 1-h delay in IMV initiation was associated with higher 30-day mortality (OR, 1.03; 95% CI 1.00–1.06; p = 0.03) [121]. However, particular attention in early intubation should be paid to cases of severe right ventricular dysfunction or tamponade. In these cases, PPV has to be used only when necessary, optimizing preload and MAP (> 60 mmHg) with vasopressors is needed and consider awake intubation if tamponade/constriction.
In CS patients, no data support the superiority of any specific mode (volume or pressure control, pressure supported ventilation [106]. Importantly, spontaneous breathing modes as PSV could increase myocardial oxygen consumption if spontaneous breathing is not fully supported, making this ventilation mode less suitable to the CS acute phase [122]. PEEP level is set at 5 cmH2O and gradually increased taking into account the respiratory (overdistension, barotrauma) and hemodynamic (decrease RV preload and increase RV afterload) risks of excessive PEEP [106]. FiO2 may be titrated to a goal of SaO2 between 92 and 98% [106]. The rationale is to avoid either hypoxemia and hyperoxemia. Of note, the ideal oxygenation targets in CS patients remain undefined in current guidelines [5, 34, 35], but emerging evidence highlights the necessary to avoid hyperoxemia, as SaO2 > 98%, that was found to be deleterious [123–125]. Respiratory rate is mainly adjusted to limit acidosis, as hypercapnia could worsen RV dysfunction. Finally, tidal volume (Vt) > 9 mL/kg seems to be associated with higher mortality (OR 9.0, 95% CI 1.3–62.0, p = 0.03), suggesting that Vt setting should not exceed 6–8 mL/kg of ideal body weight [126].
Acute kidney injury (AKI) occurs in up to one half of patients with CS, and 20% of these patients will require renal replacement therapy (RRT) [127]. AKI is a strong predictor of poor outcomes regardless of the etiology of CS [127, 128]. Indeed, patients with an indication for RRT have a two-fold increase in the risk of in-hospital mortality [127, 129, 130] along with a higher risk of long term dialysis when compared with those with no need for RRT [129]. In a recently published study, age, lactate, hemoglobin, pre-admission loop diuretics use and baseline eGFR were identified as the most important clinical predictors of poor outcomes in patients with CS requiring RRT [131].
In patients with acute decompensated heart failure with worsened renal function but without shock, RRT with ultrafiltration was associated with improved hemodynamic parameters but also with a higher incidence of adverse events and worsening of renal function and transition to dialysis [132, 133]. Recent AKIKI studies on critically ill patients with shock and AKI demonstrate no difference in terms of mortality of a delayed strategy versus an early RRT initiation strategy [134, 135]. These results highlighted that RRT may be deferred until one of these criteria is met: severe hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, pulmonary edema, blood urea nitrogen level higher than 112 mg per deciliter, or oliguria for more than 72 h.
To date, no clear recommendation exists for the ideal timing for RRT initiation in patients with CS. Available studies in this regard are scarce and limited to the post-cardiac surgery setting. In a retrospective analysis of 142 patients managed with post cardiotomy CS complicated with AKI, the early initiation of high-volume continuous veno-venous hemofiltration resulted in improved outcomes with lower in-hospital and 30-day mortality rate when compared to patients undergoing low volume hemofiltration [136]. Importantly, as patients with CS do not tolerate acute fluid shifts as observed in patients with intermittent hemodialysis, continuous RRT is the most commonly used strategy [5].
In CS, short-term acute mechanical circulatory support (aMCS) should be considered when urgent hemodynamic stabilization is needed despite ongoing medical therapies to allow for heart recovery and/or end-organ protection (as a bridge to recovery), or as a bridge to transplantation or long-term aMCS (as a bridge to a bridge or bridge to decision strategy) in appropriately selected patients, as per the 2022 AHA (Class IIa, Level of Evidence B-NR) and the 2021 ESC (IIa, C) recommendations [34, 35, 137]. Emerging data suggest that prompt implantation of aMCS devices in well-selected patients in whom decision-making is based on early invasive hemodynamic assessment and standardized treatment algorithms may improve outcomes [36, 138, 139]. However, evidence for sustained survival benefits with short-term aMCS is limited [121] and to date studies, such as IABP-SHOCK II, comparing intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) with other MCS devices like Impella, show no significant differences in mortality [42, 122–125]. Importantly, there is an absence of proof to date to prefer one to another aMCS and device selection depends on various factors, including CS phenotype and local expertise [9]. Practices on aMCS type use vary from country, particularly in France where the veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) is predominantly used, whereas the Impella device is becoming increasingly popular in the US and Germany, for example. In a recent large nationwide database in US, 20% of AMICS patients received an aMCS of which 66, 22.7 and 10.5% were Impella, VA-ECMO or combination of both devices, respectively [144]. Recent data emphasize the importance of early aMCS escalation, especially in MI-related CS. Registry findings suggest improved survival with early MCS implantation before percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) [5, 9, 34, 35].
VA-ECMO use has increased, with varying survival rates based on etiology [145–149]. Randomized studies like EURO-SHOCK [150], ECMO-CS and ECLS-SHOCK trial showed mixed results, and ongoing trial ANCHOR (NCT04184635) aims to provide further insights. In detail, results of the first randomized study were recently published (ECMO-CS): among 122 patients, there was no improvement, in patients with CS supported with early VA-ECMO, in the primary composite outcome (death from any cause, resuscitated circulatory arrest, and implementation of another mechanical circulatory support device at 30 days): 37 (63.8%) patients in the immediate VA-ECMO and 42 (71.2%) in the no early VA-ECMO groups, respectively (hazard ratio, 0.72 [95% CI 0.46–1.12]; p = 0.21. All-cause mortality was 50.0% in immediate ECMO group versus 47.5%; risk difference, 2.5 [95% CI − 15.6 to 20.7]; while the cross-over rate was 39% in no-early ECMO group [151]. Finally, in a larger randomized study (ECLS-SHOCK trial) conducted by Thiele and colleagues on 417 patients with an acute myocardial infarction complicated by cardiogenic shock, there was no difference on death from any cause at 30 days (the primary end point) that occurred in 47.8% of the patients in the ECLS group and in 49.0% of those in the control group (relative risk, 0.98; 95% confidence interval, 0.80–1.19; p = 0.81). Moreover, the use of VA ECMO was associated with increased side effects including bleedings [152]. The meta-analysis of four randomized clinical trials comparing early routine use of VA-ECMO versus optimal medical therapy alone in patients presenting with infarct-related cardiogenic shock trials did not report any significant reduction of 30-day death rate with the early use of VA-ECMO (OR 0.93; 95% CI 0.66–1.29) [153]. These data rule out the use of VA-ECMO in most patients with CS related to myocardial infarction. Further studies are needed to determine whether there is a sub-group of these patients in whom the benefits outweigh the harms, namely bleedings and vascular complications [154].
Finally, VA ECMO resulting in increased LV afterload, this may lead to inadequate unloading of the LV. Combining veno-arterial ECMO with IABP, Impella support, or atrial septostomy could be considered to achieve LV unloading [155]. Accordingly, some observational studies showed that these strategies of adding an IABP or Impella to peripheral VA-ECMO was associated to an increase in survival [156, 157].
The management of CS has seen significant advances in recent decades, but the mortality remains dramatically high. As for other types of shock, rapid recognition with multimodal evaluation by ECG, biological and echocardiographic tests allows early and appropriate management and may improve survival. Recent classifications allowing better stratification of mortality risk may be useful to guide the management. The cornerstone of CS patient management is the treatment of the cause of the cardiac insult including coronary revascularization by PCI of the culprit lesion in case of AMI. Symptomatic management aims to restore perfusion with noradrenaline and increase cardiac output with inotropic therapies. The management of other organs failure is based on optimization of mechanical ventilation and appropriate initiation of RRT. Mechanical assist devices may have an important role in CS patients but, pending the results of further clinical trials, the type and implantation timing of such techniques remain to be defined according to the expertise of the Heart Team.
Not applicable.
Acute myocardial infarction
Cardiogenic shock secondary to acute myocardial infarction
Acute kidney injury
Bilevel positive air pressure
Coronary artery bypass grafting
Cardiac output
Continuous positive airway pressure
Cardiogenic shock
Intra-aortic balloon pump
Intensive care unit
Invasive mechanical ventilation
Left ventricular
Acute mechanical cardiac support
Non-invasive ventilation
Percutaneous coronary intervention
Renal replacement therapy
Right ventricular
Surgical aortic valve replacement
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement
Transthoracic echocardiography
Veno-arterial extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation
All the authors contributed to the drafting of the manuscript. DL and NA proofread and edited the final version of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
No source of funding.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
Not applicable.
Manzo-Silberman S has received consulting fees from Bayer, Organon, Exeltis, lecture fees from Bayer, BMS, Exeltis and Organon, has served in the adjudication board for a study for Biotronik. Hamzaoui O has received lecture fees from BAXTER. Laghlam D, Benghanem S, Ortuno S Bouabdallaoui N and Aissaoui N have no competing interests to declare.
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article.
Not applicable.
Articles from Annals of Intensive Care are provided here courtesy of Springer-Verlag

==================================================

Title: Need for a Cardiogenic Shock Team Collaborative—Promoting a Team‐Based Model of Care to Improve Outcomes and Identify Best Practices
Authors: Saraschandra Vallabhajosyula, Jacob C Jentzer, Jason A Bartos, Shashank S Sinha, Balimkiz Senman, James M Horowitz, Eugene Yuriditsky, Andrea Elliott, David M Dudzinski, Jason N Katz, David D Berg, Ann Gage, Stavros G Drakos, Behnam N Tehrani, Christopher F Barnett, P Elliott Miller, Sharon Chih
Organizations: 

1
Division of Cardiology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA, 

2
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA, 

3
Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA, 

4
Department of Medicine‐Cardiovascular Division, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA, 

5
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA, 

6
Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 

7
Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine and Nora Eccles Harrison Cardiovascular Research and Training Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 

8
Department of Cardiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA, 

4
Department of Medicine‐Cardiovascular Division, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA, 

9
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Centennial Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA, 

10
Division of Cardiology, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA, 

11
Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA, 

12
Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, USA, 

12
Inova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, VA, USA, 

10
Division of Cardiology, New York University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA, 

13
Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University and Lifespan Cardiovascular Institute, Providence, RI, USA
Text:
Cardiogenic shock continues to carry a high mortality rate despite contemporary care, with no breakthrough therapies shown to improve survival over the past few decades. It is a time‐sensitive condition that commonly results in cardiovascular complications and multisystem organ failure, necessitating multidisciplinary expertise. Managing patients with cardiogenic shock remains challenging even in well‐resourced settings, and an important subgroup of patients may require cardiac replacement therapy. As a result, the idea of leveraging the collective cognitive and procedural proficiencies of multiple providers in a collaborative, team‐based approach to care (the “shock team”) has been advocated by professional societies and implemented at select high‐volume clinical centers. A slowly maturing evidence base has suggested that cardiogenic shock teams may improve patient outcomes. Although several registries exist that are beginning to inform care, particularly around therapeutic strategies of pharmacologic and mechanical circulatory support, none of these are currently focused on the shock team approach, multispecialty partnership, education, or process improvement. We propose the creation of a Cardiogenic Shock Team Collaborative—akin to the successful Pulmonary Embolism Response Team Consortium—with a goal to promote sharing of care protocols, education of stakeholders, and discovery of how process and performance may influence patient outcomes, quality, resource consumption, and costs of care.
Keywords: cardiogenic shock, education, multidisciplinary teams, process improvement
Subject Categories: Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiac Care, Heart Failure
cardiac intensive care unit
cardiogenic shock
Pulmonary Embolism Response Team
The management of cardiogenic shock (CS) is complicated. Despite innovations in pharmacologic and mechanical circulatory support, no single therapy introduced over the past several decades has resulted in a demonstrable improvement in patient survival. As a result, CS continues to be associated with high morbidity and mortality.
1
, 
2
, 
3
, 
4
 More recently, however, it has been proposed that methods for leveraging the collective cognitive and procedural proficiencies of a multidisciplinary team of providers may be helpful; in fact, the concept of a collaborative cardiogenic “shock team” is now endorsed by the American Heart Association and has been successfully implemented at a number of high‐volume clinical centers.
5
, 
6
, 
7
, 
8
 At the same time, there is a slowly maturing evidence base that has suggested that CS teams may improve patient outcomes; however, there are currently no established recommendations available to guide the composition, assembly, or employment of such teams.
9
 On conducting an informal 2023 survey of critical care cardiology physicians (representing leadership from 25 institutions in the United States) committed to the idea of the shock team, considerable heterogeneity of opinion and practice emerged. Notably, there were numerous differences with regard to staffing, structure, and care processes, along with great variation in team membership, methods of activation, and resource needs. Although several maturing CS registries are beginning to inform care—most with a particular focus on therapeutic strategies for circulatory support—none of these currently focus on the role of the shock team, the potential value of multidisciplinary management, provider education, or process improvement.
It has been nearly a decade since the Pulmonary Embolism Response Team (PERT) Consortium was established to help guide pulmonary embolism (PE) care. The goal of this group was to improve patient outcomes and to validate treatment options, while enhancing education and spearheading innovation.
10
 Over time the PERT Consortium has grown substantially in both scale and scope—in addition to its annual scientific meeting, the group has established specialized subcommittees focused on the creation of contemporary PE care protocols and the development of registry and quality databases, all with a goal of cultivating the exchange of ideas, clinical and community instruction, and outcome benchmarking. Analogous to the PERT Consortium, we believe that a CS Team Collaborative is needed to meaningfully influence the future of CS care. The aim of such a collaborative would be to bring together key stakeholders who share a commitment to advancing the implementation and integration of CS teams into clinical practice. This will include advocating for the CS team care model, developing and disseminating team‐based methods and treatment protocols, educating health care professionals and community consumers, and promoting research and innovation. In the sections that follow, we hope to highlight the impact of CS on patients, hospitals, and health care systems; to describe the merits and potential pitfalls of a team‐based approach to care; and to justify the need for a CS Team Collaborative by highlighting goals, deliverables, and keys to its maturation and sustainability.
CS is a state of extreme circulatory failure that results in maladaptive, self‐perpetuating cycles of impaired cardiac output, tissue hypoxemia, peripheral hypoperfusion, and poor vascular reactivity that can lead to irreversible multisystem organ failure (Figure 1).
5
 Historically, CS has been defined using central macrovascular parameters of blood pressure, cardiac output/index, intracardiac filling pressures, and ventricular function, in combination with varying assessments of end‐organ perfusion.
11
, 
12
 Accepted clinical trial definitions usually include 4 elements: (1) hypotension—systolic blood pressure <90 mm Hg for ≥30 minutes or use of mechanical or pharmacological circulatory support, (2) adequacy of preload—pulmonary congestion on chest imaging or pulmonary capillary wedge pressure ≥15 mm Hg, (3) low cardiac output—cardiac index ≤1.8 L/min per m2 without or ≤2.2 L/min per m2 with circulatory support therapies, and (4) hypoperfusion—cold clammy skin, oliguria (eg, urine output <30 mL/h), serum lactate >2.0 mmol/L. The Society of Cardiovascular Angiography and Intervention (SCAI) has proposed a simple, yet holistic assessment of physical examination, biochemical markers, and hemodynamics to classify patients with or at risk for CS into 5 SCAI Shock Stages of escalating severity (A through E), thus providing greater granularity to CS severity.
13
, 
14
 The society's Shock definition further elaborates important aspects such as normotensive shock, concomitant cardiac arrest, and response to therapeutic interventions in the evaluation of CS, all of which affect clinical outcomes in this population.
15
, 
16
, 
17



 
CS is the final common pathway for multiple acute cardiovascular causes including acute myocardial infarction (AMI), acute heart failure (HF), myocarditis, the postcardiotomy state, and others.
1
, 
18
 Historically, AMI has been the most common cause of CS, with higher rates noted in patients with ST‐segment–elevation MI compared with those with non‐ST‐segment–elevation MI.
19
, 
20
 In patients with AMI, CS is typically due to primary pump failure of the left ventricle resulting from myocardial necrosis, nonrevascularized ischemia, and myocardial stunning/hibernation.
21
 Mechanical complications and electrical instability can also contribute to the development or progression of CS in patients with AMI.
22
, 
23


More recently, acute HF appears to be overtaking AMI as the predominant cause for CS in today's cardiac intensive care unit (CICU).
1
, 
24
 Unlike patients with AMI‐CS who present with loss of compensatory reserve and develop hypotension as a common presenting symptom, hypotension is often the last clinical manifestation of CS in patients with HF.
25
 Those with advanced HF typically have low‐normal systolic blood pressure at baseline, higher cardiac filling pressures, and low cardiac output, without compromised end‐organ perfusion. Worsening congestion can then trigger a cycle of worsening hemodynamics and hypoperfusion.
25
 The insidious onset of hypoperfusion may lead to delays in detection and an underestimation of the true prevalence of CS in this population.
15


Less common causes of CS include myocarditis, arrhythmias, valvular heart disease, stress cardiomyopathy, and peripartum cardiomyopathy.
26
 Although CS is typically defined by elevations in left‐sided filling pressures and a decrease in cardiac output, there is now a greater appreciation for right ventricular CS in conditions including acute PE, right‐sided AMI, pulmonary hypertension, adult congenital heart disease, and acute‐on‐chronic cor pulmonale.
27
 Although echocardiography is frequently used for identification of acute right ventricular failure,
28
 many other clinical and hemodynamic markers should be considered; among these, a pulmonary artery pulsatility index defined as (systolic pulmonary artery pressure—diastolic pulmonary artery pressure)/right atrial pressure <1.0 has been increasingly used.
29
 Finally, there has also been greater recognition of mixed shock—the combination of vasodilatory shock and CS due to concomitant sepsis, systemic inflammation, cardiac arrest, and other factors.
1
, 
16
, 
17


Although CS can be thought of as a primary cardiovascular condition, the initial hemodynamic insult, if left untreated, can result in progressive metabolic perturbations and subsequent multiorgan failure.
30
 In patients with AMI‐CS, recent epidemiologic data have noted an increase in associated noncardiac organ dysfunction including respiratory, renal, hepatic, and neurologic failure.
19
, 
20
, 
31
, 
32
, 
33
, 
34
 Furthermore, contemporary patients with CS are increasingly sicker due to a higher baseline comorbidity burden, the influence of concomitant cardiac arrest, and the greater use of temporary mechanical circulatory support (MCS) options including venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
1
, 
35
, 
36
, 
37
 In totality, there has been both an increase in cardiac as well as noncardiac organ support therapies for AMI‐CS, all of which affect health care delivery and staffing in the CICU, requirements for training and proficiency among CICU clinicians, and have led to increasing health care expenditures.
30


Patients who develop CS are at high risk of short‐term mortality, with 30% to 50% of patients dying in the hospital or within 30 days.
2
 Studies diverge regarding whether the survival of patients with CS is stagnant or slowly improving, but regardless of these prevailing trends, outcomes remain poor overall.
1
, 
3
, 
4
 Persistently high mortality in populations with CS likely reflects the dearth of established therapies that are proven to improve survival in CS when applied broadly.
38
 As with mortality, nonfatal major adverse cardiovascular events, sepsis, acute kidney injury, and bleeding are common in patients with CS, particularly among those receiving temporary MCS. Indeed, the ECMO CS (Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation in the Therapy of Cardiogenic Shock) trial found that more than 60% of all patients with CS had 1 or more serious events.
39
 Long ICU and hospital stays are typical, particularly for hospital survivors, and even after discharge patients with CS remain at substantial risk of subsequent cardiovascular events, rehospitalization, and death.
Patients with CS are critically ill and have complex care needs involving the heavy consumption of ICU‐specific therapies. Although resource use varies based upon the severity of CS (being highest among those with refractory, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Intervention stage E CS), intensive cardiovascular and noncardiovascular organ support modalities are ubiquitous (Table 1).
40
 In major randomized trials of patients with CS, nearly all received parenteral catecholamines and the vast majority were invasively ventilated (Table 2).
41
, 
42
, 
43
, 
44
 Noncardiovascular therapies including targeted temperature management, dialysis, or blood transfusion are commonly required, emphasizing the multidisciplinary critical care needs of this population. The dismal prognosis associated with CS in contemporary clinical practice emphasizes the dire need to develop care strategies to improve survival. The failure of randomized clinical trials to demonstrate incremental improvements in patient‐centered outcomes with novel devices and therapeutics in populations with CS is at odds with those studies that have suggested trends toward improving survival with CS over time. If no individual therapy is beneficial when applied in a uniform manner across cohorts with CS, it stands then to reason that individualized application of these therapies could potentially yield benefit. An important approach that can leverage multidisciplinary expertise to match the most appropriate therapeutic strategy to a specific patient would be the shock team and, as detailed in this article, preliminary analyses suggest that implementation of the CS team may improve outcomes.
Cardiovascular and Noncardiovascular Resources Frequently Used in the Management of the Patient With Cardiogenic Shock
Resource Use and Outcomes in Major Cardiogenic Shock Trials With Data Combined Between Study Arms

Note: Not all variables and outcomes were reported in all studies, and in some cases combination of event counts for different outcomes could have led to overestimation. CULPRIT‐SHOCK indicates Culprit Lesion Only PCI [Percutaneous Coronary Intervention] Versus Multivessel PCI in Cardiogenic Shock; DOREMI, Milrinone as Compared With Dobutamine in the Treatment of Cardiogenic Shock; ECLS‐SHOCK, Extracorporeal Life Support in Cardiogenic Shock; ECMO CS, Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation in the Therapy of Cardiogenic Shock; IABP‐SHOCK II, Intraaortic Balloon Pump in Cardiogenic Shock II; and SHOCK, Should We Emergently Revascularize Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock.
The requirements and resources needed for hospitals and health care systems seeking to provide comprehensive care of patients with CS spans multiple domains, including: emergent treatment of the inciting event (eg, primary percutaneous coronary intervention, for ST‐segment–elevation MI), temporary MCS (often necessitating surgical expertise), CICU care, management of noncardiac organ system failures (eg, mechanical ventilation and renal replacement therapy), stepdown level inpatient care, and finally posthospital convalescent care. A variety of providers spanning the spectrum of medical and surgical specialties commonly aid in the management of the patient with complex CS. ICU and hospital lengths of stay vary depending on the cause of CS and comorbidities but are often prolonged for survivors and for those who receive cardiac replacement therapy. For patients discharged alive, median length of stay in the ICU ranges from 5 to 15 days, with hospital stays of 2 to 4 weeks being typical.
45
, 
46


Costs of care for CS are in part driven by the number and type of temporary MCS devices used. Several claims and administrative data studies have attempted to address the cost differential between various support modalities, though such investigations are plagued by issues with retrospective data including indication and illness bias (risk‐treatment paradox) and lack of data for many key clinical factors, including the device‐related complications that influence outcomes and costs in CS. A US Medicare study from 2015 to 2017 found that hospital costs for percutaneous ventricular assist device therapy versus venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation were $188 000 versus $172 000.
46
 A propensity‐adjusted study of commercially insured patients with CS from 2015 to 2020 found hospital costs of $101 000 with intra‐aortic balloon pump use versus $161 000 with percutaneous ventricular assist device.
47
 One‐year costs of care for survivors were $142 000 for patients with intra‐aortic balloon pump versus $217 000 with a percutaneous ventricular assist device; differences were attributed to device cost as well as the costs of complications including bleeding and renal replacement therapy, which were more common in the latter group. A Finnish single‐center study of consecutive patients receiving venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation from 2013 to 2017 (78% CS) reported median in‐hospital costs of 130 000€ per patient.
45
 Generalizing cost projections is difficult given the heterogeneity in MCS use, but even medically treated patients with CS require substantial resource use.
48
 Paradoxically, the more successes an acute, invasive intervention strategy has in reducing acute CS mortality, the more costs may rise disproportionately as patients who are sicker require additional rescue and ongoing hospital care including cardiac replacement therapy.
At least 20% to 30% of patients will require continued home care services or rehabilitation following the index episode of CS, adding to overall costs.
45
 Rehospitalization within 60 days and 1 year is common among survivors of CS and can further burden the health system.
49
, 
50
 An analysis of Medicare patients who survived CS showed that one third were readmitted to a hospital within 60 days.
49
 A more recent, large analysis of survivors of AMI‐CS from a Canadian provincial database showed that 42% required increased support from their premorbid baseline, and nearly 50% were rehospitalized within 1 year.
50
 Additionally, greater than one‐third of patients under the age of 60 may be unable to work permanently, adding to the overall societal impact and cost. Accordingly, optimization of care during hospitalization is not enough, and patients with CS require treatment within a chronic care paradigm in order to optimize long‐term survival.
The resource intensive nature of CS, with prolonged CICU stays and specialized MCS, has led many health care systems to regionalize care into specialized quaternary care referral centers with the advanced expertise and tools necessary for patient care within the context of a larger network. The ideal characteristics of CS centers remain unclear, but key concepts can be extrapolated from the care of cardiac arrest patients where the American Heart Association has provided class IIA recommendations for transport to specialized cardiac arrest centers when comprehensive postarrest care is not available locally.
51
 In CS, a focus on subspecialty care, temporary MCS, CICU and specialized nursing support, and postdischarge rehabilitation therapies would be analogous to these cardiac arrest centers. Additionally, patients with CS may be bridged to heart transplant or durable MCS, both of which have dramatic implications for length of stay, health care costs, complexity of care, and outcomes, and all of which underscore the importance of an integrated, multidisciplinary team‐based approach to care.
In view of the intractably high morbidity and mortality associated with CS, many experts have advocated for collaborative care models, including the employment of multidisciplinary CS teams at dedicated CS centers.
5
 Multiple examples of this type of disease‐specific, team‐based care exist in cardiovascular medicine, including the use of Heart Teams for structural and advanced coronary artery disease—a concept embraced by cardiovascular professional societies for more than a decade.
52
, 
53
 In the case of CS, several unique considerations make a team‐focused approach particularly attractive, including the time‐sensitive nature of CS care, the multiple stakeholders involved in the management of patients with CS, the potential need for cardiac replacement therapies, and the substantial variation in practice patterns within and across health care institutions and systems in contemporary clinical practice.
The quintessential syndrome of cardiac critical illness, CS is characterized by hemodynamic impairment leading to systemic hypoperfusion that, if sustained, can lead to extensive multiorgan dysfunction and a worse prognosis.
33
 Prompt recognition and early intervention in CS may therefore be important for disrupting the deadly spiral that underpins CS mortality. A team‐based approach, in which all relevant providers are notified about a CS case simultaneously by a single phone call or page, rather than through dyssynchronous and often protracted individual consultation, has the potential to expedite clinical decision‐making and reduce delays in care.
Given the complex mix of medical, catheter‐based, and surgical therapies used to treat CS, management of patients with CS is inherently multidisciplinary. In many cases, subspecialists in critical care cardiology, advanced HF and transplant cardiology, interventional cardiology, and cardiac surgery directly contribute to the care of patients, each offering a unique perspective and distinctive skill set (Figure 2). Bringing together each of these stakeholders into formalized teams with a clear organizational structure thus holds the promise of building a collaborative mentality and streamlining care delivery to those with CS.

CICU indicates cardiac intensive care unit; and EMS, emergency medical services.
Finally, given the well‐documented variation in CS management, team‐based approaches may allow for standardization of best practices by drawing on the experience of providers from different backgrounds. Indeed, observational analyses support a possible volume‐outcome relationship in CS, and by creating teams of multiple highly capable physicians, the collective experience (or “collective volume”) of the care team is amplified.
54
, 
55
 Methods to facilitate management led by cardiovascular experts and organized within cardiac‐specific subspecialty intensive care settings embedded within high‐volume centers should be prioritized as these are known to improve outcomes and resource allocation.
56
, 
57
 Moreover, team‐based care often leads to other process improvements, such as team meetings focused on continuous case review and quality benchmarking, which support broader programmatic and institutional growth and improvement in CS care.
Despite the many potential benefits of CS teams, the collaboration required for successful implementation of team‐based CS care poses several challenges (Table 3), including those related to defining a successful organizational structure, alleviating burdens of communication and inefficiency, ensuring equity of workload and reimbursement, promoting team member engagement, and minimizing physicians' sense of loss of autonomy and responsibility. Defining successful organization structure for a CS team requires addressing concerns of leadership, authority, responsibility, and ownership. The actualization of such a partnership requires buy‐in from numerous parties to a shared vision. From a CS team's inception, member alignment and agreement are imperative but are often exacting to achieve.
Potential Challenges With Team‐Based Care in Cardiogenic Shock
An ideal process lacks variability—it is consistent across time without heterogeneity in its protocols. For a CS team, this requires the ability to provide a reliable, reproducible, and consistent response regardless of time of day or day of the week. CS team membership, therefore, requires commitment from multiple members of multiple specialties, each with varying capabilities and capacity. For service lines with variable overnight coverage or only a few individuals capable of (or interested in) participating as part of a CS team, consistency of coverage or engagement may challenge the process. Additionally, reimbursement for time and participation must be addressed by each institution. Time spent on a multidisciplinary call may not be reimbursed for all providers. This frequently requires team members to participate out of their own interest or benevolence, which may not be ideal for long‐term sustainability. Between specialties, competing demands for time exist, leading to the potential for variable engagement among team members and even liability concerns.
Depending upon the member composition, CS team‐based care may also risk alienating subspecialty colleagues with considerable experience and expertise in managing these patients. Care must be taken to identify appropriate stakeholders, provider skill sets, and individuals committed to the team mission. Furthermore, undermining the revered doctor–patient relationship, a valuable cornerstone of medicine, as well as loss of physician autonomy and ownership in decision‐making, oppose traditional paradigms of medical practice. Such team‐based approaches may have the unintended consequence of decreasing physician engagement or satisfaction with potential erosion of a sense of personal responsibility.
Finally, team‐based care may also present challenges for efficiency and communication. Multidisciplinary care increases the number of participants in any given decision, and facilitating communication between numerous individuals may be cumbersome. Although recent data suggest delays in care are not a byproduct of larger team‐based decisions, this remains a concern at many institutions and among individual providers.
6


Each unit, hospital, and health care system, with its unique size, structure, culture, and experience, may face distinct challenges when it comes to implementing a CS team. At the unit level, for example, individual physicians may feel that their expertise and autonomy are being threatened when they are obligated to call other providers, particularly because they may be accustomed to making decisions independently. Therefore, for unit leaders, attention to interpersonal issues may be especially important for gaining support for CS teams.
At the hospital level, financial considerations are more likely to challenge the successful implementation of CS teams. Because programmatic support from hospital administrators often requires a clear financial incentive, hospitals may be uninterested in providing resources to support these programs. Without institutional support, the development and maintenance of formalized CS teams often falls entirely on individuals, which may be impossibly burdensome for even the most motivated physician.
At the system level, coordinating shock care across regional networks with “spoke” and “hub” hospitals requires buy‐in from an even broader set of stakeholders, including allied health personnel (eg, emergency medical systems).
7
 Lessons from other models of regionalized systems of care (eg, ST‐segment–elevation MI) may provide a helpful template for overcoming such challenges. We speculate that an increased degree of cross‐collaboration between centers within a care network could have far‐reaching implications for improving regional care beyond the CS population. With that being said, concerns from smaller, transferring institutions must also be recognized and addressed; among these, the fear of losing patients with acute cardiovascular conditions to receiving centers and the fear of being considered or perceived as less proficient in shock care must both be recognized and assuaged in order to ensure effective and durable collaboration.
The development of CS team‐based approaches at several vanguard institutions has been highly illustrative for the field. Here we examine lessons learned that were considered critical to the implementation, sustained growth, and success of 3 such programs at Inova Heart and Vascular, the University of Utah, and the University of Ottawa (Figure 3).

CVICU indicates cardiovascular intensive care unit; and MCS, mechanical circulatory support.
In July 2016, leaders at the Inova Schar Heart and Vascular Institute assembled a multidisciplinary task force composed of stakeholders from the specialties of advanced HF and transplant services, cardiovascular critical care (including cardiologists and intensivists), interventional cardiology, and cardiac surgery to review the state of CS care at the institution. Members of this team performed a comprehensive analysis of the cardiovascular service line's infrastructure, to include the historical volumes of patients admitted to the health system with a primary diagnosis of CS, mechanisms in place to facilitate transfer of patients with CS in the community to the Level 1 (highest tier) shock center, the spectrum of available therapies, and historical clinical outcomes. Their findings were consistent with contemporary clinical trial and registry data, with a survival rate to 30 days postdischarge of <50%.
8
, 
21
, 
41
, 
55
 During this analysis, the team identified 4 important themes with accompanying opportunities for improvement: (1) the care model was fractured, as there was not a standardized multidisciplinary evaluation process for patients with a suspected or confirmed diagnosis of CS; (2) patients with CS were often diagnosed late in the natural course of the disease state, when they were too ill or frail to derive any meaningful benefit from goal‐directed or salvage therapies
58
; (3) there was inconsistent access to care, in which patients with CS at the Level 2 or 3 shock centers in the community were unable to be transferred in an expedited fashion to the Level 1 center for comprehensive, multiorgan system care
59
; and (4) there were significant variations in practice patterns among providers and hospitals, in part due to the absence of adequately powered clinical trials from which to inform guidelines and management.
In response to these identified gaps in care delivery, the CS taskforce developed a diagnostic and therapeutic algorithm to help standardize care. The algorithm was predicated on 5 foundational principles of organizational structure and systems of care delivery: (1) early identification of shock; (2) comprehensive, invasive hemodynamic assessment to appropriately phenotype the disease with respect to congestive profiles; (3) minimizing the dose and duration of vasopressors, given their inherent cardiotoxic profiles; (4) when appropriate, early, selective, and hemodynamically tailored MCS with associated best practices around vascular access and closure; and (5) multidisciplinary and longitudinal 24/7 care in an American Heart Association Level 1 CICU with the full gamut of complex services—to include complex coronary revascularization, advanced cardiac replacement therapies, and dedicated, high‐intensity staffing.
5
 A 1‐call “shock line” was also developed so that when presented with a case of suspected CS, there was timely assembly of the on‐call physicians from the various specialties comprising the “shock team” to then facilitate multidisciplinary consultation and clinical decision‐making, including initial guidance to the referring physician. All cases were reviewed and discussed at biweekly quality improvement meetings. This initiative was associated with a significant improvement in short‐term outcomes, with 30‐day survival rates >70% in all patients with CS within 18 months of implementation of this new care model. Inova further developed a validated, multimodality risk score incorporating baseline demographics and hemometabolic variables at dynamic time points to help quantify risk and inform clinical decision‐making.
8
 Notably, hemodynamic parameters including cardiac power output and pulmonary artery pulsatility index at 24 hours were most prognostic of short‐term mortality, suggesting that the clinical trajectory in the first day was critical to a patient's survival.
The Inova team was among the first in the nation to demonstrate the merits of standardized care for CS across multiple hospitals and associated health systems. The team built upon early success to engage in systematic outreach efforts with 34 partnering Level 2 and 3 shock centers, spanning a geographic area of nearly 6000 square miles in Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, and the District of Columbia.
60
, 
61
 In addition to disseminating their treatment algorithm and facilitating access to their shock team, physicians and advanced practice providers from Inova participated in focused educational sessions with clinical and administrative leaders at outside hospitals, reviewing contemporary evidence in CS management, including early diagnosis, timely invasive hemodynamic assessment, indications for MCS, best practices around vascular access and critical care. Providers from the Level 2 and 3 centers were invited to the biweekly shock meetings and bidirectional feedback was provided for quality improvement. Using this approach, the Inova experience demonstrated that the implementation of a dedicated and regionalized shock network based upon standardized protocols, interhospital collaboration, and early transfer could be associated with similar short‐term outcomes (including in‐hospital mortality, 30‐day mortality, major bleeding complications, stroke, and 30‐day major adverse cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events) for all patients, independent of whether they initially presented to a “hub” or “spoke” shock care center.
7


The University of Utah (UU) Shock Team was established in April 2015, aiming to manage patients with CS using a multidisciplinary approach. The team included the following specialties: advanced HF cardiology, cardiothoracic surgery, interventional cardiology, cardiovascular ICU medicine and nursing. The team at UU opted to develop a simple, pragmatic algorithm for team activation, with a focus on ease of implementation. As a result, there are currently no hemodynamic or other clinical criteria required to justify the team's engagement. The rationale for this simplified approach was to encourage a low threshold for activation and hence more widespread use of the shock team. This has proven over the years to be effective and has resulted in relatively low rates of “false alarms.” However, after feedback from key stakeholders, suggesting that more specific criteria for team activation should be considered, reexamination of this algorithm is currently in process.
After the shock team is activated through the institution's paging system, a discussion regarding patient management is initiated between all involved parties. The on‐call shock team members are not required to be immediately present in the hospital during weekends or after hours. Once a patient has been vetted and a diagnosis of CS has been corroborated, empiric medical therapy is initiated and right heart catheterization is performed. The escalation to short‐term MCS is considered by the shock team based upon specific, predetermined criteria. In general, the philosophy the UU shock team has been to use the shock team to facilitate early identification and triage of patients with CS and leave a majority of the other decisions to the discretion of the primary cardiovascular ICU team; review of internal data did not suggest that this degree of primary team autonomy resulted in either delays in care or conflicts between health care professionals.
The HF cardiology service operates as the hub responsible for coordinating care; this seemed prudent given that the institution's HF specialists have a well‐established culture of collaboration with the different specialties involved in CS management. The importance of including and prioritizing cardiovascular ICU nursing in the central structure of the shock team was one of the lessons learned at UU. Initially this group was not included structurally on the shock team, but a change was quickly implemented thereafter and led to enhanced cohesiveness and improved communication.
Because UU is the only academic medical center in the Mountain West and cares for individuals across nearly 10% of the geographic continental United States, physical transfer of patients with CS can be unwieldy. Given the tremendous expansion of telehealth platforms, frequently leveraged during the COVID19 pandemic, the idea of a virtual collaborative shock team composed of clinicians across institutions was examined. After careful vetting, the team at the UU is currently preparing for its implementation. Continuous refinement of processes, along with ongoing research and quality improvement initiatives have been keys to the growth and sustainability of the shock team platform at UU.
The first lesson learned at the University of Ottawa was the importance of early engagement of major stakeholders, primarily critical care, interventional cardiology, cardiac surgery, and hospital administration. Institutional resources were needed, specifically the support of clinical services and access to MCS devices. Moreover, the shock team model was, to varying extents, a paradigm shift that included adoption of a dedicated mobile team to care for patients who were already being managed by another clinical team (often critical care). Demonstrating the incremental value of a separate shock team for these patients was imperative. Validating the merits of overlapping subspecialty skill sets and considering competing interests and renumeration considerations that could generate tension among team members was a priority. The early engagement of all stakeholders, with clear delineation of individual roles and the identification of specialty leads and champions was critical for acceptance, adoption, and successful clinical implementation.
A second valuable lesson was recognizing the need to adapt published management algorithms to local systems and resources. Unique institutional considerations impact the feasibility of implementing a universal model across all health care facilities. The University of Ottawa adopted elements of the shock team model vital to patient outcomes including multidisciplinary involvement to deliver multifaceted care, a coordinating physician to facilitate rapid patient triage, a 1‐call system to streamline team activation, methods for efficient virtual communication, and the use of invasive hemodynamics to guide management. Although early delivery of temporary MCS was advocated, the overall use of specific devices commonly employed in shock management algorithms was generally lower due to limited access to interventions heavily dependent upon hospital funds.
The University of Ottawa is a Level 1 shock center with a catchment of more than 30 hospitals (mostly Level 3 institutions) and is the only facility with cardiac catheterization laboratories and capability for percutaneous coronary intervention, cardiac surgery and durable, end‐stage HF therapies; therefore, the institution has a high volume and diverse patient population with CS. As a consequence, activation of the shock team in all patients with CS is impractical and risks overwhelming institutional resources. Because management protocols cannot encompass all possible patient permutations and clinical scenarios, the University of Ottawa emphasizes the value of multispecialty expertise and collective input to improve decision‐making.
A final important lesson has been the concept of “building gradually and reviewing frequently.” The program began with a limited number of highly committed shock team members and adhered to relatively narrow patient selection criteria. Over time, these procedures and approaches have been refined in parallel with the growth of team experience, expansion in the number of members, addition of new expertise, and in response to changes in patient referral patterns and the acquisition of new knowledge. This experience emphasizes the numerous similarities and occasional differences faced by institutions from different countries and regions.
PE is the third leading cause of cardiovascular mortality, posing a significant burden to the US health care system. In contrast to stroke and AMI, the relative paucity of data informing optimal PE treatment strategies has complicated approaches to management.
62
 The armamentarium for PE care has greatly expanded beyond systemic anticoagulation alone, particularly highlighted by the rapid evolution in interventional approaches. However, as data are largely limited to observational studies and underpowered trials exploring surrogate outcomes, the optimal management of patients with intermediate‐ and high‐risk PE is still unclear and increasingly heterogeneous.
63
 Accordingly, a multidisciplinary, team‐based approach that includes several specialties has been recommended to improve clinical decision‐making.
64


Modeled after other successful rapid‐response systems, the first PERT was formed in 2012 at the Massachusetts General Hospital. Inspired by their efforts, there are now >150 PERT centers internationally.
10
, 
62
 Analogous to the Heart Team concept, PERTs capitalize on the expertise of several experts convened for immediate and real‐time consultation, tasked with reaching a consensus on individualized care for complex patients.
10
, 
65
 Cross‐specialty collaboration serves to challenge the “silo mentality,” dismantle biases, leverage appropriate treatment options, and obviate the need for serial consultation.
66
 PERT programs also help with risk stratification, trainee and staff education, and the creation of longitudinal care pathways for survivors of PE.
63
, 
66


The composition of the original PERT included cardiology, cardiothoracic surgery, echocardiography, emergency medicine, hematology, pulmonary/critical care, vascular medicine, and interventional cardiology.
10
 Although the most optimal structure is still debatable, most centers use 3 to 5 specialists on their team, with critical care physicians (or intensivists) almost always present.
63
, 
67
 Interventional radiology, cardiac surgery, and cardiology have historically been included in at least 85% of PERT programs, depending upon center expertise and practice patterns.
68
 Beyond the assembly of key stakeholders, PERT implementation and integration requires careful attention to design, mechanisms for efficient consultation, quality improvement, and iterative assessment.
63
, 
65


The Massachusetts General Hospital PERT established a 24‐hour emergency activation line, promoted with an educational campaign consisting of posters and seminars.
63
 Although most commonly initiated in the emergency department, PERT activations could occur from any internal site or outside facility. Intermediate‐ and high‐risk PEs have been considered indications for PERT activation at all participating institutions, whereas low‐risk PE or clinically unclear PE cases may or may not be included (although at times PERT is also called upon for diagnostic assistance).
67
, 
69
 Upon activation, most teams convene in their entirety; a tiered approach whereby an individual evaluates a patient before group assembly is less frequently practiced.
69
 Infrastructural malleability allowing for the inclusion of non‐traditional team members (eg, obstetrics for the pregnant patient) is viewed as crucial for PERT success.
The PERT Consortium, an international nonprofit organization, was established in 2015—an aspirational goal of the Massachusetts General Hospital program to standardize PE management. Initially introduced at an inaugural meeting of >40 North American centers, the consortium now includes global membership from Europe, Asia, South America, and Australia.
69
 In an effort to promote the PERT model, educate the public and health care professionals, and drive research initiatives, the consortium publishes position statements, collaborates on clinical trials, and hosts podcasts, webinars, and meetings.
65
 Committees including Governance, Research, Education, Clinical Practice and Protocols, Development, and Communication serve as foundational elements for the group's mission.
69
, 
70


Current PERT Consortium initiatives include the creation of PE Centers of Excellence, interhospital transfer projects to facilitate patient access to care regardless of geography, and an educational bootcamp for physicians‐in‐training.
70
 The consortium also houses a quality database of >6800 patients from >30 institutions, and the embedded Pulmonary Embolism Research Collaborative is developing the foundation for the evaluation, treatment, and assessment of patients with PE in the domains of clinical care, quality assurance, and investigation.
70
 In collaboration with industry partners, the PERT Consortium is involved in several ongoing, multicenter randomized clinical trials aimed at evaluating the impact of various reperfusion therapies on patient outcomes and designed to provide the first Level 1 evidence for many contemporary therapies.
70


Little more than a decade since its inception, the rapid and broad adoption of the PERT model has simultaneously fortified and been influenced by the evolution of advanced PE therapeutics. As the field matures, the PERT Consortium offers guidance to individual institutions while supporting research, promoting education, and benchmarking care quality across the world, and may serve as an exploitable model to accomplish the same in the team‐based management of CS.
Launching PERT at the first institution required navigating challenges and forging partnerships across service lines and divisions; extrapolating the PERT model to multiple institutions added another layer of analogous obstacles to consider.
10
, 
66
 Some of the tactics that promoted the success of the PERT concept have parallels at both local and national levels, and such themes and lessons can inform and bolster the approach to a nascent Cardiogenic Shock Team Collaborative.

Clear vision and mission—PERT devoted itself to a single clinical entity and focused on a clear bottom line to “advance PE care” and “improve patient survival and outcomes.” PE is an underserved public health issue as the most common cardiovascular disease after MI and stroke. PERT also inhabited the entire universe of PE care including diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment and from acute evaluations in the emergency and critical care settings to interventional and pharmacologic therapy to transitions of care including follow‐up clinics and prevention.
Shared goals and purpose—PERT defined specific, actionable goals that allowed multiple stakeholders to contribute. PERT sought to expand its model, contribute to the scientific literature on PE, assist with funding, and educate the general public. This mission purposefully parallels the “triple threat” in academic medicine: clinical, educational, and research excellence.
Passionate, committed leadership—visionary leadership is required to affect visionary change. PERT leaders manifested a commitment founded on the pure aim of addressing PE but were tireless in activity, giving voice to a previously unorganized group of like‐minded professionals.
“Big tent” approach—PERT not only allowed but actively welcomed all entities and persons interested in contributing to their vision. From within health care, all phases of PE support, all specialties, all role groups, and all levels of expertise were welcomed. PERT programs proliferated across the United States and globally with hundreds of organizations adopting the concept.
Building partnerships and collaborations—PERT forged partnerships among hospitals, but importantly with industry and government, including the US Food and Drug Administration.
Embedded educational objectives—PERT endeavored to use education in the form of a continuing medical education conference and patient materials from the very outset. Additionally, PERT used multimodal channels including innovative social media and asynchronous learning for delivery of content on a regular basis.
Promotion of mentorship—The collaborative nature of the PERT organization facilitated mentorship outside of traditional specialty siloes and across institutions.
Contribution to scholarship—PERT created a forum for PE scholarship to complement existing channels and sought to proactively drive research agendas.
“Buzz”—PERT successfully undertook marketing, social media, and custom‐branded materials to build identify and cultivate interest.
Applying these lessons, the PERT Consortium and its member institutions have enjoyed several successes along multiple dimensions of its mission (Table 4).
71
, 
72
, 
73
, 
74
, 
75
, 
76
, 
77
 PE and CS have parallels as acute cardiovascular conditions, with high morbidity and mortality, and without an obvious evidence‐based best practice strategy, and thus for which multidisciplinary care, empiric interventional treatment, and networks of hub‐and‐spoke teams became a foundation of care delivery.
Successful Initiatives From the PERT Consortium
APEX‐AV indicates Evaluating the Safety and Efficacy of the AlphaVac Multipurpose Mechanical Aspiration (MMA) F1885 PE for Treatment of Acute Pulmonary Embolism; HI‐PEITHO, Ultrasound‐Facilitated, Catheter‐Directed, Thrombolysis in Intermediate‐High Risk Pulmonary Embolism; PE, pulmonary embolism; PERT, Pulmonary Embolism Response Team; PE‐TRACT, Pulmonary Embolism‐Thrombus Removal With Catheter‐Directed Therapy; and STORM‐PE, Prospective, Multicenter, Randomized Controlled Trial Evaluating Anticoagulation Alone Vs Anticoagulation Plus Mechanical Aspiration With the Indigo Aspiration System for the Treatment of Intermediate High Risk Acute Pulmonary Embolism.
The ability of the PERT Consortium to attract, retain, and rapidly increase membership is remarkable given the ever‐growing demands on time and financial resources of health care providers and organizations. Brent Keeling, past president of the PERT Consortium, shared insights into important strategies and decisions made by leaders that were important steps toward gaining early traction and facilitating subsequent growth.
At its inception, the PERT Consortium was a coalition of the willing—a grassroots effort that brought together individuals and institutions interested in PE. In the early days, PERT members joined to explore and discuss the current state of knowledge and strategies for improving care for a deadly disease that was not the primary focus of any existing organization. Maintaining engagement required more than simply common interest, and necessitated offering unique benefits from belonging to the PERT Consortium. At the time, there were no high‐quality data characterizing acute PE. The formation of a one‐of‐a‐kind national PE data repository created immediate value for members, offering access to data for research and for institutions to use in order to assess performance and organize quality improvement efforts—collecting and maintaining the highest quality data about acute PE for these reasons remains a foundational principle of the group upon which growth and sustainability rest.
Engagement, collaboration, and inclusivity with all stakeholders are the common themes at the core of PERTs and the evolution of the consortium's membership. The new PERT model of multidisciplinary team‐based decision‐making shifted the burden of managing complex, high‐risk patients away from individual providers, leading to increases in the number of PE clinical experts, PE researchers, and institution leaders focused on PE quality—all of whom found a professional home within the PERT Consortium. Mid‐ and late‐career professionals joined early. Opportunities to engage early‐career members and trainees were created by offering valuable research and leadership roles, including opportunities within trainee councils and invited roles for fellows, residents, and even high school students at the annual PERT symposium. Social media‐savvy members were leveraged to recruit their colleagues to join. The PERT Consortium has partnered effectively with other professional societies such as the National Thrombosis Forum and works collaboratively with international organizations such as the EXPERT‐PE group in Europe. There is also engagement at the institutional level with membership in the PERT Consortium and recognition through the “center of excellence” program, which identifies high‐performing sites as offering best quality PE care. From its inception, patients have also been welcomed into the PERT Consortium, with prominent roles in the national meeting and campaigns such as the “PE Looks Like Me” effort that seeks to bridge the gap between patients and care providers to spread awareness about the illness.
Building financial strength is necessary for the growth of any organization, and consistently adequate funding is often difficult to obtain. The PERT Consortium has addressed this challenge with a strategy of cultivating a myriad of diverse funding sources. As with other similar organizations, industry collaboration is key. Additional funding comes from a variety of sources including events such as the annual PERT gala, membership dues, “center of excellence” fees, and philanthropy.
We have outlined the many challenges associated with building and growing shock teams and have described several institutional success stories, albeit with important lessons learned along the way. Additionally, the PERT Consortium serves as a noble model for the creation of a similar program focused on the single clinical entity of CS. In order to improve outcomes for these patients within the complex and varied contemporary clinical landscape, we believe that it will be important to put together a shock team collaborative to identify and disseminate best practice principles for multidisciplinary care.
As described in this article, the management of the patient with CS is complex and frequently requires multidisciplinary collaboration.
5
 Care heterogeneity exists within and across health care institutions and systems. Such heterogeneity threatens to stymie collaborative scientific endeavors and potentially undermine patient outcomes. Challenges in CS care include but are not limited to (1) the ability to identify patients early; (2) the institution of timely, life‐saving interventions; (3) the transfer of patients to centers with advanced resources; (4) an understanding of the utility of temporary MCS devices; (5) the vetting of indications for escalation or deescalation of support; and (6) the capacity to define optimal methods to facilitate transition from temporary to more durable heart‐replacement strategies. Few would argue that CS care is easy, and complicated problems often require coordinated decision‐making. We believe that the employment of a CS team can lead to better outcomes and more thoughtful resource use. Although there exist several high‐quality CS registries and collaboratives that have been pivotal toward our understanding of the contemporary landscape, none have specifically focused on the shock team, multidisciplinary involvement, or process improvement.
The mission of the CS Team Collaborative will be to improve the management and outcomes of patients with CS through innovative, efficient, multidisciplinary, and reliable team‐based models that leverage novel therapeutics and state‐of‐the‐art cardiovascular critical care principles. The goals of this alliance will include (1) the promotion of the CS team model within health care institutions across the United States, (2) the sharing of team‐based algorithms and the identification of opportunities for care standardization, (3) the education of health care professionals as well as the general public about CS, and (4) the systematic exploration of how process and performance affects patients, care quality, resource allocation, and costs (Figure 4).

 
CS teams serve as the infrastructure for a system of care aimed at early identification of patients at risk for destabilization and effective communication between invested members. Building a CS team collaborative necessitates partnerships between multiple physician specialists, including providers from community to quaternary care facilities. The scope of this collaborative should not be limited to physicians alone; instead, a comprehensive CS team collaborative should also include input from members of patient transport teams, nonphysician practitioners, nursing, hospital administration, bed flow management personnel, and others. In order to foster knowledge exchange and promote a global perspective on the transformation of CS management, the collaborative should likewise seek the inclusion of international medical experts. Engagement and input from relative stakeholders will be critical. By working together on recommendations with a common goal to improve patient outcomes, this model can fortify the mutually beneficial relationships and establish requisite trust to build highly functional teams. The collaborative should also seek to include representation from CS data repositories, including the Cardiogenic Shock Working Group, the American Heart Association Cardiogenic Shock Registry, Extracorporeal Life Support Organization, Society of Thoracic Surgery Intermacs, and the Critical Care Cardiology Trials Network, to inform recommendations and to identify areas for organized research efforts, and even industry‐based registries necessary to evaluate real‐world practices and complication rates. These partnerships can serve as the foundation for systematic expansion of the current evidence‐base pertaining to CS management.
To bring together this extensive network of leaders in CS care, with the objective of developing necessary clinical, educational, and research initiatives, there will be a need for substantial resources. Much like with the PERT Consortium, financial sponsorship in the form of grants or industry funding, endorsement from a broad set of professional organizations, and a platform for dissemination of collaborative outcomes will be imperative. This platform may include various elements such as publications, a dedicated website, educational materials, and interdisciplinary conferences designed for a broad audience. Furthermore, the resources allocated for the collaborative should be designed for long‐term sustainability, including iterative processes for the inclusion of data and feedback from self‐instituted quality assessment measures. A quality assurance and review process should be integrated into the planning phase to ensure that the collaborative's mission and objectives are being successfully addressed. Finally, the successful execution of a project of this magnitude requires robust administrative support, technical assistance, and committed project management time from leadership.
Although a number of institutions have introduced and refined their employment of CS teams, there remains a notable absence of comprehensive data and consensus necessary to determine optimal team composition, appropriate activation processes, and the specific roles of clinician members. Additionally, although there are observational data to suggest that CS teams likely enhance patient outcomes, concrete evidence for this is lacking, as is a clear understanding of the financial implications for patients and institutions.
Collaborative initiatives, such as the one proposed, are particularly vital for situations where multiple practice patterns exist in the absence of clear guidance to address superiority. We hope that this collaborative can serve as a platform for amassing data to help our community better understand the impact of CS teams on important outcomes and that these data will inform future investigation. Not only that, but we believe this endeavor can function as a multi‐institutional and even multinational forum to facilitate real‐world discussions on the challenges and successes of CS teams and provide a platform for thoughtful analyses, derivation of prudent quality metrices, and institutional self‐reflection. These collaborations enable the sharing of experiences and therefore can foster mutual learning opportunities and a deeper, shared understanding of a complex subject matter—something vital to our work in CS (Figure 4).
Despite notable advances in pharmacologic and mechanical therapies for CS, the burden of morbidity and mortality remains unacceptably high.
5
 Recognizing the inherent complexity of these patients, their often extensive multiorgan involvement, and the imperative need for earlier disease recognition and timely intervention, novel approaches must be considered and vetted as quickly as possible. Emerging data suggest that the involvement of a multidisciplinary CS team may improve outcomes.
6
, 
7
, 
61
 Consequently, professional societies have expressed support for these dedicated programs.
Although a growing number of health care institutions have embraced the concept of the CS team approach to patient care, many challenges exist to their creation and implementation. Even where CS teams have been embedded within health care systems, substantial heterogeneity exists in regard to composition and care processes. This variability can be attributed, in part, to a lack of consensus within the cardiology and critical care communities as to the optimal model and role for CS team‐based management; hence, there are few data to inform guidelines and limited guidance from which to inform standards of care.
In light of these challenges, we have proposed the establishment of a Cardiogenic Shock Team Collaborative comprising key stakeholders in the field. The primary objective of this consortium will be to address and mitigate the inter‐institutional disparities in care seen with early team‐based methods. Our approach will involve thoughtful dialogue, rigorous research, and the structured examination of various multidisciplinary care models to determine optimal composition and operational strategies—akin to the successful development and maturation of the PERT Consortium model nearly a decade ago. From this, we aspire to cultivate a comprehensive CS team registry to aggregate and generate evidence to inform future practice. An inaugural meeting, perhaps embedded within an existing shock conference, will look to serve as an opportunity to unite key partners, facilitate discussion on the current landscape, identify gaps in knowledge and research priorities, and exchange insights on site‐based successes and challenges that can be disseminated to the community at large. Through an iterative process, we believe that the CS Shock Team Collaborative will help to foster a community focused on practical guidance, the generation of novel data, and the development of innovation for a complex pathology and clinical condition that continues to kill our patients at an alarming rate.
None.
Dr. Berg has received institutional grants to Brigham & Women’s Hospital from AstraZeneca and Pfizer; honoraria from the Medical Education Speakers Network and USV Private Limited; consulting feeds from AstraZeneca, MobilityBio, Pfizer, and Youngene Therapeutics; and serves on clinical endpoint committees for studies sponsored by Beckman Coulter, Kowa Pharmaceuticals, and Tosoh Biosciences. Dr. Drakos serves as a consultant for Abbott Corporation and receives research support from Novartis.
The American Heart Association celebrates its 100th anniversary in 2024. This article is part of a series across the entire AHA Journal portfolio written by international thought leaders on the past, present, and future of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular research and care. To explore the full Centennial Collection, visit https://www.ahajournals.org/centennial.
This article was sent to Sula Mazimba, MD, MPH, Associate Editor, for review by expert referees, editorial decision, and final disposition.
For Sources of Funding and Disclosures, see page 16.
Articles from Journal of the American Heart Association: Cardiovascular and Cerebrovascular Disease are provided here courtesy of Wiley

==================================================

Title: Predictors of Outcomes in Myocardial Infarction and Cardiogenic Shock
Authors: Deepak Acharya
Organizations: 
Text:
Myocardial infarction (MI) complicated by cardiogenic shock (MI-CS) is a major cause of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Predictors of outcomes in MI-CS include clinical, laboratory, radiologic variables, and management strategies. This article reviews the existing literature on short- and long-term predictors and risk stratification in MI complicated by CS.
Keywords: myocardial infarction, cardiogenic shock
Myocardial infarction (MI) complicated by cardiogenic shock (MI-CS) remains a major problem in cardiovascular medicine. Although outcomes have improved over the last 2 decades with early revascularization and modern intensive care, morbidity and mortality remain high.
Many investigators have evaluated predictors of developing cardiogenic shock (CS), as well as mortality after the development of CS, in an attempt to better understand patient populations, to assist in the triage of patients for specific therapies and clinical trials, and to determine prognosis. However, there is wide heterogeneity among these studies, including in the definition of CS, patient populations and risk profiles, the nature of predictors evaluated, therapies available or utilized, and outcome measures. The majority of studies are observational with some selection bias, data quality is sometimes inconsistent, and the results are not generally validated in other populations. Furthermore, not all important variables may have been collected or analyzed, some variables collected may not be routinely available in clinical practice, and many studies were small and had limited power to evaluate multiple predictors. Conversely, the few large randomized studies often had more homogeneous populations and well-defined era-specific management strategies that may not necessarily be applicable to current real-world situations. Therefore, the applicability and accuracy of a particular set of predictors or risk scores to an individual patient in current practice are uncertain. Given the significant heterogeneity in patient populations and management strategies, systematic reviews and meta-analyses have generally not been performed.
This review will summarize currently available evidence on the factors that influence or predict outcomes in MI-CS. A wide range of clinical, laboratory, radiologic, and angiographic variables and therapeutic approaches have been evaluated. Predictors from these various domains that have been consistently useful in risk stratification across different patient populations, eras, and management strategies are highlighted. A comprehensive understanding of the most relevant factors may better identify an individual patient trajectory and assist in the development of management strategies, including timing, techniques, and mode of revascularization, the transfer to tertiary centers, the institution of more aggressive mechanical or pharmacological support, appropriate resource utilization, or compassionate palliative care in futile situations. This information may also facilitate discussions of prognosis with family members, provide a framework for risk stratification for future clinical trials, and be valuable for quality assessment and targeted efforts for institutions.
Studies were identified through a systematic search of the PubMed database, clinicaltrials.gov, and Cochrane database of Systematic Reviews. No limits were set on language, publication status, and start date. Randomized and nonrandomized studies were included. The literature search was performed until October 31, 2017. Titles and abstracts were screened for potentially relevant articles. All articles that reported on mortality and predictors of outcomes were reviewed. Full-length manuscripts and online appendices of relevant articles were evaluated. Reference lists of primary studies were reviewed for additional references. Studies on CS not exclusively caused by MI were excluded unless there were important findings specific to the MI-CS populations. Predictors reported are those after multivariable analysis unless otherwise noted.
Multiple clinical criteria have been used to predict the development of CS in patients with MI (Table 1).1–11 In the majority of patients, shock develops after admission rather than at presentation.12,13 Early reperfusion may prevent the development of CS.14,15 Patients at high risk of developing CS may benefit from expedited revascularization, more focused hemodynamic management, intensified monitoring for worsening symptoms and hemodynamic parameters, and early transfer to tertiary care centers with advanced interventional and heart failure facilities.
Predictors of Developing Cardiogenic Shock in Patients With Myocardial Infarction

Multiple studies have identified age as an independent predictor of poor outcomes.16–19 In a prespecified subgroup analysis of the Should We Emergently Revascularize Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock (SHOCK) trial, patients aged 75 years or older did not derive benefit from early revascularization.20 A detailed analysis of these patients concluded that this finding may have been related to small sample size, the comparator >75-year-old medical therapy group being a lower-risk group with similar survival to patients <75 years, and more unfavorable characteristics including lower left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and poor intraaortic balloon pump (IABP) response in the elderly revascularization group.21 A subsequent analysis of the SHOCK registry revealed that while older patients have higher risks than younger patients, there is still a significant survival benefit to early revascularization.22 Age >65 years was also an independent predictor of 30-day mortality in the Impella-EUROSHOCK registry of patients with refractory CS receiving the Impella 2.5 device.23 The analyses of patients with MI-CS in the Melbourne Interventional group registry showed that patients 75 years or older had similar 1-year outcomes to younger patients, higher long-term mortality than younger patients, but age was not an independent predictor of long-term mortality in a multivariable analysis.24,25 In an analysis of 761 patients with ST elevation in MI (STEMI) and CS treated with thrombolytic therapy, mortality was higher in older patients. However, the effect of age was modulated by hemodynamics, and patients >75 years old with systolic blood pressure (SBP) > 80 mm Hg and heart rate (HR) <100 bpm had substantially better outcomes than patients <60 years who had SBP <100 mm Hg and HR >100 bpm, and similar outcomes to patients 60–75 years with SBP >80 mm Hg and HR >100 bpm.26 Therefore, older patients, although at higher risk, can derive benefit from aggressive management in appropriate situations, and age by itself should not be the determining factor in the formulation of management strategies.
Prior MI can lead to worse outcomes in those who develop CS, presumably because of a lower reserve to tolerate additional injury.16 Diabetes mellitus (DM) has been identified as an independent risk factor in some studies but not in others.17,19,27,28 Anoxic brain injury,29 higher body mass index, cerebrovascular disease, stroke, peripheral vascular disease, history of angina, prior percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), dialysis, and white race are other risk factors for mortality in individual studies.19,30 Different studies have shown contradictory results regarding a protective effect of either sex on mortality.19,31,32 Cardiac arrest, as expected, is a significant risk factor for mortality.33 However, patients successfully resuscitated from out-of-hospital cardiac arrest and presenting to the hospital in a comatose state or who present with CS to the hospital can still have significant benefit from revascularization.34,35
In a Danish study of 444 patients with MI-CS from the thrombolytic era, the majority (59%) had shock within 48 hours of presentation, 11% developed shock on days 3–4, and 30% developed shock after day 4. Late shock was a significant predictor of 30-day mortality compared to early shock (mortality 87% versus 45%). Those with late shock were more likely to be female, a lower proportion received thrombolytics, and a higher proportion had in-hospital reinfarction.36 In the SHOCK registry,37 the median time from the start of MI symptoms to the onset of shock was 6.2 hours. Among 815 patients, 46.6% had shock within 6 hours, and 74.1% had shock <24 hours. Shock developed later with triple vessel disease compared to single or double vessel disease. Those with late shock had recurrent ischemia and Q waves in two or more leads. In contrast to the Danish study, in a subgroup analysis of the SHOCK registry, the mortality was higher in patients with early versus late shock, but the timing of shock was not an independent predictor of mortality in multivariable analysis.37 A Swiss registry that included 1977 patients with MI-CS between 1997 and 2006 showed that outcomes had improved over the study duration, and mortality rates became similar (≈48%) between those that presented with shock and those that developed shock in the hospital.7 A population-based study from Massachusetts38 of patients admitted between 2001 and 2011 found that the in-hospital mortality of those who had CS before admission increased from 38.9% to 53.6%, whereas mortality decreased for patients who developed CS, either within the first 24 hours of admission or later during hospitalization. Overall in-hospital mortality was 45.7%, 32.8%, and 54.1% for the prehospital, early, or late groups, respectively.38 Aggregate data suggest that although the influence of timing of shock development may differ due to changes in management approaches, most patients develop CS once admitted, therefore, providing an opportunity for early diagnosis and management.
The duration of shock is important because a longer time in shock can lead to systemic inflammatory response failure and multisystem organ failure, after which time the benefit of revascularization or mechanical support becomes more limited. The National Cardiovascular Data Registry (NCDR) Cath-PCI registry recently updated and validated a risk model, in which patients with transient shock had a risk of in-hospital mortality of 15.1%, those with sustained shock or salvage status had a 33.8% risk, and those with sustained shock and salvage, defined as recent cardiopulmonary resuscitation or extracorporeal life support (ECLS), had a 65.9 % risk of in-hospital mortality.39 Among patients with shock, earlier revascularization improves outcomes (see Section Timing of PCI).
A substudy of the SHOCK trial showed that there was a higher rate of improvement of cardiac index and stroke volume index with early revascularization compared to intensive medical management. In multivariate analysis, baseline stroke volume index and follow-up stroke work index and stroke volume index predicted mortality.40 A SHOCK registry analysis found that cardiac power, which incorporates the product of cardiac output and systemic blood pressure, was the most important hemodynamic predictor of mortality.41 An analysis of the Tilarginine Acetate Injection in a Randomized International Study in Unstable MI Patients with Cardiogenic Shock (TRIUMPH) study of 396 patients with refractory CS despite patent artery and 90% IABP use identified baseline SBP to be a powerful predictor of mortality (odds ratio 0.63 for 10 mm Hg increment in SBP).42 The shock index (SI), defined as HR/SBP, is a simple measure with significant prognostic significance. In an analysis of 644 patients with STEMI, 20% of patients with an SI >0.8 died, whereas 4% of patients with an SI <0.8 died, and the SI was a powerful independent predictor of mortality.17 Popovic et al43 evaluated 85 patients with MI-CS and Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI)-3 flow after revascularization and found that the cardiac power index (defined as stroke work × HR), mean arterial pressure <75 mm Hg at 6 hours, and Simplified Acute Physiology Score (SAPS) II score predicted in-hospital mortality. Patients who continue to have high-risk hemodynamic parameters after revascularization could be considered for mechanical circulatory support.
In addition to macrocirculatory hemodynamic disturbances, patients with shock can also have microcirculatory dysfunction. Sublingual perfused capillary density (PCD) predicted a change in the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score and improvements in PCD with management-predicted better outcomes, and patients with PCD above the median had higher rates of organ recovery. PCD was an independent predictor of 30-day outcome in a multivariable analysis.44
A substudy of 198 patients from the SHOCK trial with electrocardiograms (ECGs) within 12 hours of onset of shock showed 3 variables to predict 1-year mortality: HR, a prolonged QRS duration in patients in the initial medical stabilization group only, and the sum of ST depressions in patients with inferior MI in the initial medical stabilization group. Early revascularization appeared to eliminate the excess risk associated with these ECG findings.45 The Manitoba Cardiogenic Shock Registry evaluated 210 patients with MI-CS.46 ST elevation >0.5 mm in lead aVR could predict significant left main stenosis (>50%) with sensitivity 59%, positive predictive value 30%, specificity 77%, and negative predictive value 92%.47
The Multicenter Investigation of Limitation of Infarct Size (MILIS) study, started in 1976, identified LVEF by radionucleotide ventriculogram as an independent predictor of mortality in CS.1 A substudy of the SHOCK trial showed that LVEF < 28% and mitral regurgitation (MR) severity (2+ or more) were the only independent echocardiographic predictors of 30-day and 1-year mortality, and there was benefit to early revascularization at all levels of LVEF and MR.48 In the CREATE trial, LVEF < 40% was associated with an odds ratio of 3.78 for 30-day mortality.49 In another study of 147 patients, patients with no, mild, moderate, and severe MR had 1-year mortality of 8%, 23%, 30%, and 58%, and each grade increase in MR was independently associated with a 71% increase in mortality after accounting for LVEF, multivessel disease, no reflow, age, gender, and prior MI.50 Right ventricular dysfunction, defined as tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion ≤14 mm, was an independent predictor of long-term survival in patients with STEMI and CS on admission after adjustment for age, admission glucose, and LVEF <40%.46
The importance of collaterals to the infarcted territory was demonstrated by Williams et al51, who reported in 1976 that the presence of collateral vessels supplying the infarcted area was associated with a lower incidence of CS and mortality.
The culprit artery on angiogram has prognostic implications.52 Among 1190 patients from the SHOCK registry who had CS from pump failure or mechanical complications, the left anterior descending artery (LAD) was more often the culprit vessel in those with ventricular failure, and circumflex (LCx) was more likely to be involved in patients with mechanical complications. Patients with mechanical complications had worse outcomes. For patients with ventricular failure, angiographic disease severity, culprit lesion location (worse with left main and saphenous graft lesions), and TIMI flow grade were associated with higher in-hospital mortality.53 Similarly, the SHOCK trial angiographic correlates of 1-year mortality were a higher number of diseased vessels, decreasing initial TIMI flow, and non-right coronary artery (RCA) culprit lesions.54 A review of 483 patients from the NCDR identified total occlusion of the LAD to be associated with an odds ratio of 2 for in-hospital mortality.31 A registry study of 1333 patients undergoing PCI for MI-CS found TIMI < 3 flow after PCI, 3-vessel disease, and left main disease to be independent predictors of mortality.55 A series of 25 patients with MI-CS related to left main disease showed 60% in-hospital mortality, with right bundle branch block and low HCO3− levels as independent mortality predictors.56 A registry study of 2090 patients with STEMI treated with PCI found that the in-hospital mortality was highly correlated with the infarct-related artery, and left main-, LAD-, LCx- and RCA-related MI-CS were associated with 64.7%, 41.0%, 36.0%, and 30.8% mortality, respectively.52 In a large NCDR analysis, left main disease and proximal LAD disease were independently associated with mortality. The Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions (SCAI) Class IV lesions were also associated with higher in-hospital mortality compared to Class I lesions.19 Other studies have also shown 3-vessel disease to predict 1-year outcomes.57 In a study of 212 patients with MI-CS who underwent early PCI, there was no difference in 30-day mortality between patients with LAD versus RCA/LCx culprit lesions, suggesting that an early presentation and a successful reperfusion with aggressive PCI and adjunctive therapies may attenuate the historically observed higher mortality with anterior infarctions.58
Chronic total occlusion (CTO) in a noninfarct artery indicates a higher total area of jeopardy and fewer potential collaterals to the infarct-related artery. The presence of CTO of the noninfarct artery was associated with a hazard ratio of 2.1 for 1-year mortality in 292 patients with MI-CS.59 Patients with STEMI who develop CS are more likely to have CTOs than those who do not develop CS. Among 141 patients with STEMI and CS on admission, 0% patients with >1 CTO survived, whereas 59.8% of those without CTO were alive at 30 days.10 In STEMI patients with CS, multivessel disease with and without CTO were predictors of 30-day mortality.60
Cardiogenic shock occurs in a smaller proportion of patients with non-STEMI (NSTEMI) compared to those with STEMI, but mortality is high in either condition once shock develops. In the Global Utilization of Streptokinase and Tissue Plasminogen Activator for Occluded Coronary Arteries (GUSTO) IIb trial which enrolled patients between 1994 and 1995, those with NSTEMI who developed CS were older, had a higher prevalence of diabetes and 3-vessel coronary artery disease, and less TIMI 0 flow on angiography than STEMI patients who developed shock. Shock developed at a median of 76.2 hours in the NSTEMI group compared with 9.6 hours in the STEMI group. The 30-day mortality was 10% higher in the NSTEMI shock group, and NSTEMI was an independent predictor of mortality in multivariable analysis.61 A report from the SHOCK trial registry revealed similar differences in baseline characteristics and also found that NSTEMI patients were less likely to undergo angiography. The rates of revascularization and in-hospital mortality were similar in the 2 groups in the SHOCK registry.62 A more contemporary analysis from the NCDR showed that NSTEMI shock patients were older, more likely to be female, have DM, a history of MI, revascularization, and congestive heart failure compared with STEMI shock patients. The NSTEMI group was more likely to develop shock after hospitalization, whereas the STEMI group was more likely to present with shock. The NSTEMI group also had more 3-vessel disease and lower LVEF. The rates of revascularization were significantly lower in the NSTEMI than in the STEMI group (56.5% versus 95.8%), and the NSTEMI patients who were revascularized had significantly longer times to PCI or coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) compared to STEMI patients. Mortality risk was higher in NSTEMI versus STEMI (40.8 versus 33.1%).63
Patient characteristics and comorbidities may influence management approaches in NSTEMI shock. However, for those who are candidates for aggressive management and reperfusion, approaching the situation with the same urgency as STEMI shock may provide an opportunity to improve outcomes.
Hyperlactatemia can reflect impaired tissue perfusion, intracellular metabolic derangements, and hepatic dysfunction. In one study, lactate > 6.5 mmol/L was a powerful independent predictor of 30-day mortality.64 In another study, each mmol increase in lactate was associated with an odds ratio of 1.14 for mortality, and fewer than 30% of patients with peak lactate >10 μmol/L survived to discharge.29 Lactate clearance <10% can also predict intensive care unit and 90-day mortality. Impaired lactate clearance may reflect ongoing hypoperfusion and poor oxygen delivery or impaired clearance because of renal or liver dysfunction.65 In the Impella-EUROSHOCK registry, lactate >3.8 mmol/L on admission was a strong predictor of 30-day mortality, and lactate levels decreased with Impella support.23 In the CREATE trial of 518 Chinese patients, admission glucose levels >7.8 mmol/L and sodium <130 mmol/L were among independent predictors of 30-day mortality.49 Based on the available evidence, hyperlactatemia or impaired clearance with standard therapies are easily available measures that could be utilized as triage variables for more aggressive measures.
Acute renal failure is an important predictor of mortality, both as a marker of the severity of shock, and also as a direct mediator of poor outcomes. Patients with MI-CS who are older, have lower LVEF, or require mechanical ventilation are more likely to develop acute kidney injury.66 The development of acute renal failure within 24 hours of onset of shock was associated with an 87% mortality in one series.67 In another, an increment of 10 mL/min in creatinine clearance was associated with an odds ratio of 0.77 for mortality.42 Baseline renal insufficiency was associated with an odds ratio of 3.45 in 210 patients with CS.29 Several other studies have shown impaired renal function to predict mortality.10,31 A IABP-SHOCK II substudy evaluated novel renal function biomarkers, including neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin, kidney injury molecule 1, and cystatin C, and several equations to calculate renal function. Serum creatinine had a better individual predictive value than any of these biomarkers, and the biomarkers did not provide incremental prognostic information in multivariable analysis after accounting for creatinine.68
There is increasing recognition that CS is not simply a low perfusion state. Particularly with severe or late-stage shock, there is systemic inflammation associated with a low systemic vascular resistance and vasopressor resistance. Mediators of these pathways are not well understood.
In a study of 87 patients, those with CS (mostly from MI) had higher interleukin(IL)-6 levels than noncritically ill patients but lower IL-6 levels than patients with septic shock. However, once CS patients developed multiorgan failure, IL-6 levels were similar to those found in septic shock. Furthermore, elevated IL-6 levels in CS patients who were not in multiorgan failure at the time of sampling predicted progression to multiorgan failure.69 In an analysis of 38 patients with MI-CS, higher IL-6 concentrations were associated with a higher vasopressor requirement and independently associated with higher 30-day mortality.70 In another study, the IL-6 level was the strongest early independent predictor of 30-day mortality.18 In addition to IL-6, elevations in IL-8 and IL-10 and lower IL-7 levels were associated with higher mortality in the IABP-SHOCK trial.71
In 52 patients with acute coronary syndrome, C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were significantly higher in CS patients compared to those with unstable angina or NSTEMI. CRP levels were not statistically higher in CS versus STEMI without CS. Procalcitonin levels were highest in the CS group, followed by STEMI, then unstable angina/NSTEMI. The authors conclude that CRP better reflects myocardial ischemia and related inflammatory responses, and procalcitonin reflects a higher degree of inflammatory activation seen in shock.72 In another study, admission levels of CRP and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 were independent predictors of in-hospital and 1-year mortality.73
Activated protein C is involved in inflammatory and coagulation pathways, and low levels were associated with higher mortality in septic patients. Recombinant activated protein C (APC) was developed, approved, and marketed for severe sepsis, but later withdrawn from the market due to lack of efficacy and complications. A report of 43 patients with MI-CS showed lower APC levels in CS patients compared to MI patients who did not have CS. Nonsurvivors had lower levels of APC at day 2, and APC levels were inversely correlated with IL-6.74
Catalytic iron is involved in free radical generation. In an IABP-SHOCK II substudy, higher catalytic iron levels were associated with higher mortality, and the authors advocate further studies to evaluate the therapeutic role of chelation therapy in this situation.75
Despite individual studies illustrating inflammatory derangements, there is significant physiologic complexity and pathway redundancy, which presents challenges in identifying and developing therapeutic targets. As an example, preclinical studies demonstrated that inflammation can lead to induced nitric oxide synthase (NOS), resulting in excess inhaled nitric oxide production and systemic vasodilation. Small clinical studies suggested a benefit of NOS inhibitors in MI-CS. However, in the larger TRIUMPH trial, NOS inhibition with tilarginine did not influence 30-day mortality in patients with MI and refractory CS despite patent infarct-related artery.76 Further investigation into the biochemical and molecular mechanisms of shock is necessary before targeted drugs can be developed.
Further supporting the influence of the systemic inflammatory response in outcomes, several investigators have found that risk scores initially created for sepsis or medical intensive care unit patients have prognostic value in MI-CS patients. Kellner et al77 evaluated 41 patients with MI-CS and found that the mean admission Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE II), APACHE III, SAPS II, and SOFA scores were higher in nonsurvivors versus survivors. Maximum scores of APACHE II, APACHE III, and SAPS II also had prognostic significance.
The use of novel biomarkers for risk stratification in MI-CS is at a relatively early stage compared to other conditions such as sepsis. Table 2 summarizes novel biomarkers that have been evaluated in MI-CS.78–82 Studies of multiscale approaches to identify a wide range of molecular biomarkers, gene expressions, and pathophysiologic cascades in an effort to better understand the pathophysiology of CS and identify therapeutic strategies are underway.
Selected Biomarkers With Prognostic Value in MI-CS

Biomarker studies have the potential to greatly improve our understanding of molecular and pathophysiological alterations in MI-CS, and the relative ease of biomarker studies makes them attractive targets of investigation. However, important recognized limitations of biomarker studies include study quality heterogeneity, inadequate methodology, and publication and interpretation biases. These limitations and the distinction between association and causation may limit the clinical utility of some biomarker studies.
Several groups have developed risk scores that integrate different clinical parameters in an attempt to predict outcomes. The relevant factors vary, but age, success of revascularization, and measures of end-organ perfusion are consistently in risk scores across multiple studies (Table 3).33,83–87 In addition to these studies, the CardShock study derived a risk score from a population of CS patients with and without acute coronary syndromes and validated it in the IABP-SHOCK II population. Independent in-hospital mortality predictors were acute coronary syndrome etiology, prior CABG, confusion, previous MI, blood lactate, LVEF, age, and SBP. Estimated glomerular filtration rate was added to these variables to create a CARDSHOCK score.88
Integrated Risk Scores in AMI-CS

The ability to successfully restore perfusion in the infarct-related artery has been consistently shown to be a crucial determinant of in-hospital, 30-day, and long-term survival.16,57,58,89–92 In the SHOCK trial, 30-day survival was 65% with successful PCI and 20% with unsuccessful PCI.93 TIMI score ≤ 2 post-PCI had an odds ratio of 19.5 for 30-day mortality in a study of 45 patients with STEMI and CS.64
The timing of reperfusion is also important. A longer time from randomization to PCI was associated with higher mortality in the SHOCK trial.93 Early revascularization not only influenced early mortality but was associated with a 67% relative improvement in 6-year survival in SHOCK.94 In a German registry of 1333 patients with MI-CS, a longer time interval between symptom onset and admission was associated with higher mortality, and each hour delay between symptom onset and PCI was an independent predictor of in-hospital mortality (odds ratio 1.04).55 In the Comparison of Angioplasty and Prehospital Thrombolysis in Acute Myocardial Infarction trial (CAPTIM), among patients randomized within 2 hours of symptom onset, those receiving thrombolytics had a lower incidence of CS development and mortality than those receiving PCI, who on average got revascularized 1 hour later than thrombolytic administration.95 Very early reperfusion may decrease the incidence of CS and mortality.15
In several studies, including the SHOCK,93 NCDR registry analysis,96 Arbeitsgemeinschaft Leitende Kardiologische Krankenhausärzte (ALKK)-PCI registry,97 the Euro Heart Survey (EHS)-PCI registry,98 and the CULPRIT-SHOCK study,99 multivessel as compared to single vessel PCI was associated with a higher mortality. In the IABP-SHOCK II trial and several other studies, mortality was similar with multivessel or single-vessel PCI.100–102 In contrast, several studies have shown that the ability to achieve complete revascularization in those with multivessel disease and CS is associated with higher in-hospital survival.29,103,104 A meta-analysis of 10 observational studies showed that multivessel PCI was associated with increased risk of short-term mortality compared to culprit vessel–only PCI (relative risk (RR) 1.26, P = 0.001). Long-term mortality was not different between the groups.105
In these studies, the strategy of multivessel PCI versus culprit lesion–only PCI was at the discretion of the operator and not randomized. The 2013 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association STEMI guidelines do not provide a specific recommendation for culprit vessel versus multivessel PCI in AMI-CS.106 The 2012 ESC STEMI guidelines recommend multivessel PCI “in the presence of multiple, truly critical (≥90% diameter) stenoses or highly unstable lesions (angiographic signs of possible thrombus or lesion disruption) and if there is persistent ischemia after PCI of the supposed culprit lesion.”107 The clinical uncertainty in management of these patients was partly reflected in a Cath-PCI registry analysis of 56,497 patients with AMI-CS, which revealed that rates of multivessel PCI actually decreased from 31.5% to 25.7% between 2005 and 2013.19
CULPRIT-SHOCK is a recently published randomized trial designed to provide a more definitive answer to this question. Investigators randomly assigned 706 patients with MI-CS from STEMI or NSTEMI to immediate multivessel PCI or culprit lesion–only PCI with the option of staged PCI of nonculprit vessels. At 30 days, those with culprit vessel–only PCI had lower mortality (RR 0.84, 95% confidence interval 0.72–0.98, P = 0.03) and lower composite primary endpoints of death and renal replacement therapy (RR 0.83, 95% confidence interval 0.71–0.96, P = 0.01).99 Future guideline recommendations are likely to change in favor of culprit vessel–only PCI in light of the CULPRIT-SHOCK findings.108
A meta-analysis of 8 observational studies with 8131 patients undergoing angiography or intervention in the setting of CS revealed that when compared with the transfemoral access, the transradial access was associated with a lower risk of mortality (unadjusted risk ratio 0.6) and fewer major adverse cardiac and cerebral events (unadjusted risk ratio 0.68). The benefit of the transradial approach over the transfemoral approach for PCI was observed even in patients who had femoral IABP in place.109 Another prospective study of 101 patients with MI-CS in a radial first center showed that transradial access was feasible in 73% of patients, that patients undergoing transfemoral PCI were sicker, and that transradial PCI was associated with lower mortality rates and fewer bleeding events.110 These were all observational studies with potential selection bias, and no randomized trials specifically evaluating access site and outcomes in MI-CS are currently available.
In the SHOCK trial, patients undergoing CABG had similar outcomes to those receiving PCI despite having more coronary artery disease and a higher incidence of DM.111 With contemporary management, in-hospital mortality with isolated CABG in MI-CS is 18%, with higher mortality in those that require mechanical circulatory support.112 A recent report of 506 patients with MI-CS undergoing isolated CABG identified serum lactate >4 as the strongest predictor (odds ratio 4.78) of in-hospital mortality. Other predictors were age >75 years, LVEF <30%, and STEMI.113 No randomized study has compared multivessel PCI to CABG in patients with multivessel coronary artery disease and MI-CS.
Dobutamine is the preferred inotropic agent, and norepinephrine is the recommended vasopressor agent in most clinical guidelines.106,114 A Cochrane database systematic review evaluating trials of inotropic and vasodilator agents until 2013 concluded that there was no convincing evidence to support any particular agent over others to improve survival.115 Scarce data exist regarding the optimal vasopressor agent. A subgroup analysis of a randomized study comparing norephinephrine versus dopamine demonstrated that in CS, which in the majority of patients was caused by MI, norepinephrine was associated with a lower 28-day mortality than dopamine.116
While inotropic and vasopressor agents may improve cardiac output and blood pressure, they also increase myocardial work and oxygen demands and, in the setting of CS and MI, have the potential to exacerbate injury. When there is severe shock from large amounts of myocardial necrosis, vasoactive agents simply may not be adequate to maintain cardiac output and end-organ perfusion.
Many nonrandomized and some randomized studies in the thrombolytic era have shown a survival benefit of IABP in MI-CS.117–120 In the PCI era, several meta-analyses and the IABP-SHOCK I and IABP-SHOCK II randomized trials did not show a mortality benefit of IABP as the primary hemodynamic support device for all patients.120–122 Therefore, IABP recommendations have been downgraded in the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association and European Society of Cardiology STEMI guidelines.106,107
In the majority of the aforementioned clinical trials, the timing of IABP insertion was left to the discretion of the operator, and in the IABP Shock II trial, under 15% had IABP before revascularization.123 More recently, however, animal studies have demonstrated better outcomes with unloading before reperfusion, and there has been renewed interest in the ideal timing of IABP insertion.124 In one study, postponing the insertion of IABP after PCI was a strong independent predictor (odds ratio 5.2) of in-hospital mortality.125 A study of 218 patients with STEMI-CS showed that IABP before PCI was associated with a longer door-to-balloon time but improved myocardial perfusion as assessed with myocardial blush grade and resolution of ECG ST elevation. Independent risk factors for 12-month mortality were door-to-balloon time, IABP support after PCI, and acute kidney injury. The actual survival did not differ between the IABP before PCI and IABP after PCI groups.126 Another study of 102 patients with MI-CS found age, resuscitation before PCI, IABP after PCI, acute renal failure, and vasopressor use to be independent predictors of in-hospital mortality.127 Another single-center study showed that age <60 years and IABP alone, as opposed to IABP in combination with inotropic support, were independent predictors of survival. Although this could indicate that deleterious effects of inotropes play a role in poor outcomes, treatment assignment was not randomized, so patients in the combination group may represent a sicker cohort.128 In another cohort of 508 patients undergoing CABG for MI-CS, IABP before CABG was associated with a 14% lower in-hospital mortality than IABP after CABG.113 Not all studies, however, have found that earlier IABP improves outcomes.129
Other percutaneous mechanical support devices, such as Impella and Tandemheart, are increasingly being utilized for hemodynamic support. Many observational studies have suggested benefit, sometimes dramatic, but randomized trials have not shown survival advantage over IABP, in part because they have been small studies and may have been underpowered to demonstrate survival benefit.130–135 Significant hemodynamic improvement is seen with percutaneous mechanical circulatory support.130 The USpella registry showed that the use of Impella 2.5 was PCI was associated with improved survival and more complete revascularization compared to insertion of Impella 2.5 after PCI.136 A more recent analysis from the catheter-based Ventricular Assist Device registry showed similar findings with early utilization of Impella Cardiac Power (CP) or 2.5 devices before PCI and before high-dose inotropic support. Multivariate predictors of survival were early implantation of mechanical circulatory support before PCI and the use of mechanical circulatory support before requiring inotropes and vasopressors.137 The IMPRESS-SHOCK trial of 48 patients with late severe MI-CS (>90% with cardiac arrest, 100% ventilated) randomized to IABP versus Impella CP did not show a survival benefit to Impella over IABP. However, the primary cause of death was neurologic, highlighting the fact that hemodynamic support late in the course of shock has limited benefit. There was a trend towards lower mortality if IABP/Impella was initiated prior to PCI (25% versus 53%, P = 0.16).133
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) is another widely used modality in the management of profound CS, and multiple investigators have reported on its utility in MI-CS (Table 4).138–144 In one study of patients with profound CS, ECMO-assisted PCI was associated with better survival, and ECMO support resulted in odds ratio of 0.22 for 30-day mortality in multivariable analysis.145 Another single-center study of 98 patients with MI with refractory CS or cardiac arrest showed 67% in-hospital mortality with ECLS. No patients were bridged to transplant or were reported to have durable left ventricular assist device (LVAD) because of local regulations, donor availability, and other logistical considerations. Predictors of mortality were unsuccessful reperfusion, asystole or pulseless electrical activity before ECLS introduction, and ECLS-related complications.146 A single center study of 77 patients with MI-CS requiring ECMO identified preimplantation lactate, creatinine, and cardiopulmonary resuscitation as independent predictors of 30-day mortality. Of 77 patients, 40 died on ECMO, 19 were weaned, of whom 15 survived to 30 days. Of 18 patients who failed the ECMO weaning trial, 13 underwent LVAD placement and 5 were transplanted. All 5 transplants and 10 of the 13 (77%) LVAD patients were alive at 30 days, highlighting the utility of ECMO as a valuable bridging strategy for more durable support.147
Extracorporeal Life Support in MI-CS

An innovative study evaluated outcomes of 119 patients weaned off ECMO. Seventy-seven of these patients had been initially cannulated for CS for a variety of indications, including MI. In-hospital mortality was 26%. Independent predictors of in-hospital mortality were mean arterial pressure, daily urine output on the second day after ECMO removal, and SOFA score on the day of ECMO removal. Patients with a SOFA score ≤13 had 13.2% mortality compared to 67.9% mortality in those with SOFA scores ≥14. Those with acute kidney injury in the 48 hours post ECMO removal had mortality of 45.1% versus 6.5% in those who did not have kidney injury.148 These high-risk patients may be considered for reinitiation of mechanical support or durable support if otherwise suitable.
For those patients who have persistent shock despite inotropes or short-term devices, or those who stabilize with temporary mechanical circulatory support but cannot be weaned off, surgical LVAD may offer an effective long-term management strategy.149 An overall strategy of aggressive management with early revascularization and tailored hemodynamic support with all available devices, including IABP, ECMO, LVAD, and subsequent transplantation is associated with better outcomes compared to more conservative approaches.150
Given the proven benefit of therapeutic hypothermia post cardiac arrest, there has been interest in its role in MI-CS without cardiac arrest, but the data are limited. The 40-patient randomized SHOCK-COOL trial of mild therapeutic hypothermia in MI-CS patients without standard indications for hypothermia failed to show any survival benefit of therapeutic hypothermia at 30 days.151
A small but randomized study evaluated HR lowering with ivabradine in 58 patients with MI-CS. In-hospital mortality was 6.75% in the ivabradine group and 14.3% in the control group (P = NS).152 This was a relatively low-risk cohort as evidenced by the mortality rates, but poses interesting questions regarding ideal HR and myocardial demand.
Given the complexity of decision-making, the lack of an evidence base for standardized society guidelines, and multiple management approaches in MI-CS, there exists the possibility for significant heterogeneity in patient management and delays in care. Therefore, in-hospital multidisciplinary shock teams, protocol-driven management, care bundles, shock centers, and regional systems of care with clear predefined algorithms and channels of communication have been proposed as strategies to improve outcomes associated with CS.153 The few small studies that have evaluated these strategies have included acute MI and nonacute MI patients and have demonstrated that shock teams can decrease time to intervention and may improve mortality.154–156 Also, the interhospital transport of CS patients with mobile CS or ECMO teams is feasible.157,158 A recent pilot study also demonstrated that in MI-CS patients, a protocol-driven collaborative management approach among several hospitals that included early identification, relatively liberal mechanical circulatory support (Impella) implant criteria, unloading before reperfusion, hemodynamic monitoring, and escalation based on hemodynamics was associated with 76% survival to discharge.159 The absolute magnitude of benefit of these interventions is not known given the absence of a “standard” management/control group, but the results are encouraging, and larger validation studies are underway.
In the GUSTO 1 trial, 30-day survivors of MI-CS had an annual mortality of 2%–4% during years 2–11, no different from patients who had acute MI without shock. Predictors of higher long-term mortality in 30-day survivors were older age, male gender, DM, higher Killip class, hypertension, previous MI, current smoking, anterior infarct, previous cardiovascular disease, prior CABG, and higher HR.160 This excellent long-term survival in GUSTO 1 preceded the routine utilization of modern heart failure therapies. The “calm after the storm” was also seen in the SHOCK trial, where 62% of those in the early revascularization arm who survived hospitalization were alive 6 years later. Predictors of higher long-term mortality were similar to those observed for 30-day mortality and included older age, shock on admission, creatinine ≥1.9 mg/dL, history of hypertension, and noninferior wall location. LVEF was also predictive of mortality, but hemodynamic variables such as cardiac power index and cardiac index that predicted 30-day mortality did not predict long-term mortality.94,161 In older Medicare patients who have MI-CS and survive to discharge, the risk of death was higher than in nonshock patients for the first 60 days, but comparable to nonshock patients after 60 days. Over 30 independent predictors of 1-year survival were noted, including age, LVEF, and peak serum creatinine.162
Several findings are consistently observed across many studies. Revascularization has benefit at all risk levels. Hemodynamic parameters and measures of end-organ perfusion, including lactate and creatinine, are important predictors of outcomes. Mechanical circulatory support has a role in improving outcomes, but defining appropriate population and best mode of support has been difficult. Earlier MCS appears to be beneficial, but when is too early and when is too late has not been conclusively determined and needs further study. Emerging concepts of “door-to-unloading” time and well-defined bundles of management approaches await large multicenter clinical trials. Despite high clinical acuity at presentation, many MI-CS patients can have excellent long-term outcomes with some recovery of contractile function and physiologic accommodation. Therefore, a focus on improvement in early mortality via the thorough understanding of the inflammatory response and prevention or early reversal of end-organ dysfunction may provide these critically ill patients with improved quality and longer duration of life.
Disclosures: The authors have no conflicts of interest to report.
Articles from Cardiology in Review are provided here courtesy of Wolters Kluwer Health

==================================================

Title: Management of cardiogenic shock
Authors: Sean Fitzgerald, Suzanne de Waha-Thiele, Holger Thiele, Anne Freund, Uwe Zeymer, Steffen Desch
Organizations: 
1Heart Center Leipzig at University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 
3University Heart Center Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany, 
4Heart Center Leipzig at University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 
6Klinikum Ludwigshafen, Ludwigshafen, Germany, 
7Heart Center Leipzig at University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany
Text:
Despite the rapidly evolving evidence base in modern cardiology, progress in the area of cardiogenic shock remains slow, with short-term mortality still reaching 40-50%, relatively unchanged in recent years. Despite advances with an increase in the number of clinical trials taking place in this admittedly difficult-to-study area, the evidence base on which we make day-to-day decisions in clinical practice remains relatively sparse. With only definitive evidence for early revascularisation and the relative ineffectiveness of intra-aortic balloon pumping, most aspects of patient management are based on expert consensus, rather than randomised controlled trials. This updated 2020 review will outline the management of CS mainly after acute myocardial infarction with major focus on state-of-the-art treatment based on randomised clinical trials or matched comparisons if available.
Left or right ventricular failure subsequent to acute myocardial infarction (AMI) remains the most frequent cause of cardiogenic shock (CS), accounting for approximately 80% of cases. Mechanical complications of AMI represent less frequent causes of CS (ventricular septal rupture [4%], free wall rupture [2%], and acute severe mitral regurgitation [7%])
1. Given the relatively heterogeneous nature of the causes of non-infarct-related CS in comparison to AMI-CS, such as decompensated acute on chronic heart failure, valvular heart disease, acute myocarditis, Takotsubo syndrome, and arrhythmias
2, treatment of each potential underlying causative factor will not be addressed in detail, but overarching guiding principles will be elucidated.

The incidence of CS complicating AMI has historically been found to be of the order of 8% for STEMI, and 5% for NSTEMI
3. Although there has been some degree of disagreement in recent registries with regard to the rate of change of this figure, and whether it is in fact increasing or decreasing, overall, the most recent data do not differ markedly
4
5. Despite evidence-based therapeutic advances, foremost coronary revascularisation with subsequent survival benefit, mortality rates still remain unacceptably high at 40-50%
6
7. Indeed, with an ageing population coupled with an increase in comorbidities, there are data to suggest increasing mortality rates
8
9. These observations appear logical in the setting of an increased prevalence of diabetes mellitus and renal disease. In the setting of the recent COVID-19 pandemic, the picture is heterogeneous
10. Admissions for AMI in general were significantly reduced in Italy, along with an increase in complications including CS-AMI
11. However, in Denmark and Austria, no change in the rates and mortality for CS-AMI was noted. This may, however, reflect the severity of the COVID-19 situation in each country during the period for which data were collated
12
13.

The underlying causes, pathophysiology, and treatment of AMI-CS have been reviewed previously
2
14. This 2020 update will focus on evidence-based therapeutic management of AMI-CS with major emphasis on current guideline recommendations, revascularisation strategies, intensive care unit (ICU) treatment, adjunctive medication, and mechanical circulatory support (MCS) devices. The main focus is set on randomised controlled trials (RCT) or, where not available, on relevant matched comparisons. Furthermore, major research areas and gaps in evidence will be elucidated.

The central pathophysiological hallmark of CS is critical end-organ hypoperfusion and hypoxia due to reduced cardiac output as a consequence of primary cardiac disorders
2. The diagnosis of CS can be made in routine practice on the basis of clinical criteria reflective of persistent hypoperfusion without adequate response to volume replacement as manifested by cold extremities, oliguria, or altered mental status in combination with biochemical manifestations of inadequate tissue perfusion such as elevated arterial lactate.

Most accepted definitions of CS include specific blood pressure parameters, generally a systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg for ≥30 minutes, or mechanical/pressor support required to maintain values above this. It should be noted, however, that in certain cases compensatory mechanisms may preserve blood pressure through vasoconstriction, while at the same time tissue perfusion and oxygenation may be significantly decreased, the so-called “normotensive CS”
14. Urine output <30 ml/hr and arterial lactate >2.0 mmol/l satisfy the criteria for clinical and biochemical manifestations of inadequate tissue perfusion.

Although not mandatory in clinical practice, objective haemodynamic parameters such as reduced cardiac index and increased pulmonary capillary wedge pressure are helpful for diagnosis confirmation, and are essential in terms of more clearly defining the status of the right heart and systemic vasculature, particularly in those patients who do not respond in the expected manner to initial therapy. The pulmonary artery pulsatility index (PAPI) may have a particular role for right ventricular function assessment here
15.

Understanding of the complexity of CS has evolved over the last decades and in recent years additional insights have been gained in the understanding of CS severity and phenotyping such as left, right or biventricular predominance. In general terms, there is a profound depression of myocardial contractility resulting in a potentially deleterious downward spiral of reduced cardiac index, low blood pressure, hypoperfusion and maladaptive cycles of ischaemia, inflammation, initial vasoconstriction and later vasodilation, culminating in various degrees of multiorgan failure with subsequent death if untreated.
Although not specific to CS, arterial lactate has been shown to be strongly predictive of mortality. Evidence for lactate in CS had been relatively sparse. A recent sub-analysis of the Intraaortic Balloon Pump in Cardiogenic Shock II (IABP-SHOCK II) trial and registry attempted to clarify the prognostic value for mortality of lactate clearance versus single measurements at admission and after 8 hours in AMI-CS
16. The 8-hour value was a significantly better predictive parameter than baseline or lactate clearance. Lactate at 8 hours ≥3.1 mmol/l and clearance
<-3.45%/hr remained independently predictive for time to death. Another new score (CLIP score) based on biomarkers has recently been introduced. Based on the CULPRIT-SHOCK biomarker substudy, the four most relevant prognostic biomarkers are cystatin C, lactate, interleukin-6 and NT-proBNP
17. The CLIP score outperformed clinical CS scores and is objective without requirement for input of subjective parameters. Multiple other novel biomarkers - involving metabolomics, proteomics, genomics and transcriptomics - in addition to lactate and creatinine measuring the degree of inflammation, renal function, and liver involvement, respectively, have been shown to be associated with impaired prognosis
(Table 1).

Clinical and biological factors used for prognosis assessment have been summarised in multiple scores in the I) pre-shock, II) full CS, and III) venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) settings previously
18.

Of these, the IABP-SHOCK II score, which was developed exclusively in AMI-CS patients, incorporates the biomarkers lactate, creatinine and glucose, and has both internal and external validation
19. The SCAI CS classification with the stages A (at risk), B (beginning), C (classic), D (deteriorating), and E (extremis) was developed based on clinical considerations by expert consensus for both AMI-CS and non-AMI-CS
20. It has been validated in several retrospective cohorts and one prospective study
(Table 2)
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28. Overall, on the basis of these data, the SCAI classification appears to fulfil its goal as a tool correlating well with prognosis. The SCAI score may have its advantage as a dynamic score evaluating the course of CS over time but is currently not well suited as a numerical immediate score for decision making in the cath lab. Furthermore, the SCAI shock classification validation is not always very objective because many variables were not available for score validation, leading to subjective classification. In addition, as for biomarkers alone, none of the scores (including SCAI and IABP-SHOCK II) have been used so far to guide CS therapy.

The
Central illustration provides a general overview of the necessary steps in assessment and management of the AMI-CS patient.
Figure 1 provides an up-to-date summary of RCT in AMI-CS and the respective mortality indicating relative risk (RR) and 95% confidence interval (CI).


Treatment algorithm highlighting the key considerations in the diagnosis and management of cardiogenic shock. A level I shock centre has cardiac catheterisation and advanced MCS available 24 hrs, 7 days/week with on-site cardiothoracic surgery support, level II has PCI facilities 24/7 but is without on-site MCS. AMI: acute myocardial infarction; CI: cardiac index; CICU: cardiac intensive care unit; CPO: cardiac power output; ECG: electrocardiogram; Hb: haemoglobin; LVAD: left ventricular assist device; MCS: mechanical circulatory support; SCAI: Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions

Current evidence from randomised clinical trials in cardiogenic shock in the PCI era. The relative risk and 95% confidence intervals (CI) are depicted for the various randomised interventions. The SOAP II trial was neutral with respect to mortality for the overall trial, thus the predefined cardiogenic shock - including various causes of cardiogenic shock - subgroup results need to be interpreted with caution. CABG: coronary artery bypass grafting; CS: cardiogenic shock; IABP: intra-aortic balloon pump; IABP-SHOCK: Intraaortic Balloon Pump in Cardiogenic Shock; SHOCK: SHould we emergently revascularise Occluded Coronaries for cardiogenic shocK; SMASH: Swiss Multicenter trial of Angioplasty for SHock; SOAP II: Sepsis Occurrence in Acutely Ill Patients II; TRIUMPH: Tilarginine Acetate Injection in a Randomized International Study in Unstable MI Patients With Cardiogenic Shock; PCI: percutaneous coronary intervention
Where local protocol and logistical feasibility allow, patients with CS should be treated at specialised tertiary CS care centres, with the ability to start and escalate MCS, and dedicated cardiac ICU and cardiac surgery facilities on site
2
29. Studies in the USA have shown that mortality rates are lower in those centres with the highest quartile of mean annual CS case volume, even when controlling for early revascularisation, and that lower-volume hospitals were less likely to offer aggressive and specific treatments for CS
30. This holds true both for the case of CS-AMI and for CS due to other causes
31. Furthermore, the collaboration of an expert “Shock Team” at these centres, consisting generally of an interventional cardiologist, cardiac surgeon, advanced heart failure cardiologist and cardiac intensivist, has been shown to be an independent factor in improving outcomes
32. At a bare minimum, when transfer to a level one centre is not immediately logistically feasible, the patient should be brought to a centre with 24/7 PCI facilities. The definition of “immediate” will of course need to take local circumstances into account, but a recommended transfer time of <120 minutes has been proposed
29.

The key issues surrounding revascularisation for CS-AMI are summarised in this section with important interim developments addressed. Although nowadays the results of the SHOCK trial
33, which compared early revascularisation with initial medical stabilisation, may be viewed in a different light in that it failed to meet its primary 30-day endpoint of decreased mortality in the early revascularisation group compared to the medically managed group, the long-term results showing reduced mortality at 6 months, 1 year and 6 years
34, as well as the evidence borne out in subsequent registries, appear to justify the Class IB recommendation for early revascularisation
35
36
37. In summary, as in the case for AMI without CS, early revascularisation is key; multiple registries have shown a delay in revascularisation in the setting of cardiogenic shock to be associated with poorer outcomes
38
39.

The vast majority (between 70 and 80%)
18 of patients who present with AMI-CS have multivessel coronary disease. Until the results of the randomised, multicentre Culprit Lesion Only PCI versus Multivessel PCI in Cardiogenic Shock (CULPRIT-SHOCK) trial
7, there was a dearth of evidence to guide decision making. However, both the 30-day and one-year results of this trial clarify that there is significant net clinical benefit to culprit-only revascularisation, driven principally by a difference in mortality. This was consistent across all subgroups
40. Specifically, the rate of death and renal replacement therapy, as a composite endpoint, in the culprit lesion-only PCI group was 45.9%, compared to 55.4% in the multivessel PCI group (RR 0.83, 95% CI: 0.71-0.96; p=0.01) including a significant mortality reduction. Importantly, the majority of surviving patients in CULPRIT-SHOCK underwent staged protocol-recommended revascularisation during follow-up in the initial culprit lesion-only PCI group. Thus, the preferred revascularisation strategy is culprit lesion PCI with subsequent staged revascularisation after clinical stabilisation similar to the ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) setting without CS.

Current guidelines recommend early revascularisation by PCI or coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) depending on coronary anatomy and amenability to PCI
35
36
37. Based on evidence from four observational reports, comparing PCI versus CABG, the type of revascularisation did not influence the outcome in AMI-CS, and thus there is little evidence to recommend one strategy in preference to the other
41. A trial of culprit lesion-only PCI with staged revascularisation versus immediate CABG in patients with multivessel disease and CS may clarify matters and is currently in development in the USA and in Germany.

Current guidelines recommend radial access as default strategy in non-shock STEMI
36 or non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes (NSTE-ACS)
37, and also stable coronary artery disease
35, on the basis of a survival benefit and a lower risk of vascular complications. In CS, the benefit does not have the same breadth of evidence, but that which is available appears to favour radial access. Radial access was associated with a reduction in all-cause mortality in a meta-analysis of observational data analysing 8,131 patients with AMI-CS
42. Recent data from the CULPRIT-SHOCK trial confirmed the benefit of the radial approach in CS with lower mortality at 30-day follow-up (37.3% vs 53.2%, adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 0.57, 95% CI: 0.34-0.96)
43. Where the femoral approach is chosen, use of ultrasound-guided access may reduce bleeding complications
44.

There is a lack of RCT-derived evidence for antiplatelet and antithrombotic medication specifically in the setting of CS, and thus all recommendations are derived from more general AMI trials. Caveats to be aware of include the presence of impaired enteral resorption in CS for oral antiplatelets, often potentiated by the co-administration of opioids. The ongoing Dual Antiplatelet Therapy for Shock patients with Acute Myocardial Infarction (DAPT-SHOCK-AMI) trial (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT03551964), assessing intravenous cangrelor versus crushed oral antiplatelets, may shed light on this matter. The benefit of routine upstream use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors has not been shown to be superior to standard treatment
(Figure 1)
45. These considerations are discussed further in the recent ESC position paper on antithrombotic therapy in patients with ACS complicated by CS or out-of-hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA)
46.

Due to the complexity of most CS presentations, these patients are best treated in specialised ICUs, allowing close monitoring of volume status, vasopressor and inotropic support, and the prophylaxis and treatment of multiorgan dysfunction syndrome (MODS)
2
29. Fluid administration in CS is based mainly on pathophysiological considerations and, according to current guidelines, a fluid challenge as first-line therapy should be considered unless there are signs of overt fluid overload (class 1C recommendation). Despite the frequency with which inotropes and vasopressors are administered in patients in CS (approximately 90%)
6, it should be remembered these drugs increase myocardial oxygen consumption and vasoconstriction, and may impair microcirculation and increase afterload. Thus, as a general rule they should be administered at the lowest possible dose for the shortest possible duration.

In the SOAP II trial
47, involving 1,679 shock patients, 280 of whom had CS, norepinephrine appeared favourable compared to dopamine given the propensity of dopamine to cause arrhythmia in the overall cohort. Furthermore, when only the CS subgroup was considered, this group was noted to have a lower mortality with norepinephrine. As shown in the OPTIMA-CC trial in AMI-CS, norepinephrine also appears favourable over epinephrine in terms of minimising both metabolic changes (including lactic acidosis) and heart rate, without having an appreciable difference in effect on cardiac index
48. Indeed, there was in fact more refractory CS with epinephrine than norepinephrine (37% vs 7%; p=0.008), leading to the trial being terminated early. Thus, norepinephrine appears to be the vasoconstrictor of choice in refractory CS, reflected in ESC recommendations, albeit with a class IIb B recommendation. There are no data on vasopressin in the CS setting.

The target mean arterial pressure (MAP) is not well defined in CS. Previously, in contrast to the recommendations for septic shock, consensus cautioned aiming for a MAP >65 mmHg as it had been shown to be potentially associated with more side effects
49. However, a recent combined analysis from two RCT assessing two different MAP goals in patients after OHCA showed lower indirect infarct size as measured by cardiac troponin in the subgroup of AMI-CS patients randomised to a target MAP of 85-100 mmHg
50. This is currently only hypothesis-generating and requires a large-scale RCT to prove the optimal MAP in CS.

Inotropes, e.g., dobutamine, may be given simultaneously with norepinephrine in an attempt to improve cardiac contractility (class IIb, level of evidence C)
51. Despite pathophysiological considerations potentially favouring the mechanism of action of inodilators such as levosimendan or phosphodiesterase inhibitors, their current evidence base is very limited. Proof of concept was suggested in a very small trial of 32 CS patients with lower mortality in levosimendan in comparison to enoximone
(Figure 1)
52. However, to date, these findings have not been replicated in larger-scale studies
53
54
55
56.

Although there is no specific evidence base in CS, ICU treatment should follow general best practice guidelines, with regard to lung protective ventilation (6 ml/kg predicted body weight tidal volume), thromboprophylaxis, stress-ulcer prophylaxis, glycaemic control, and nutritional supplementation.
Indications for renal replacement therapy do not differ from those in the general ICU setting (uraemia, refractory volume overload, metabolic acidosis [pH <7.2] and refractory hyperkalaemia [>6.0 mmol/l]). There is also now conclusive evidence from two large RCT showing no benefit of earlier initiation of renal replacement therapy
57
58.

Elevated liver transaminases, as a surrogate for liver hypoperfusion, have been shown to be associated with increased mortality, and so care should be taken to stabilise haemodynamics in this setting
59.

Moderate/severe bleeding is common in CS, ranging from 20-90% depending on the definition used, and is also influenced by concomitant use of MCS
60. A recent pre-specified post hoc analysis of the CULPRIT-SHOCK trial revealed that a total of 21.5% of patients with AMI-CS experienced at least one bleeding event up to 30 days
61. Most frequent were Bleeding Academic Research Consortium (BARC) category 3a bleeding events (33%); 5.4% of bleeding events were fatal. Treatment with active MCS by VA-ECMO or Impella™ (Abiomed, Danvers, MA, USA) emerged as the major risk factor for bleeding, as was noted in a 2014 meta-analysis
62. Next to the requirement for significantly larger access sheaths, the risk of bleeding may be increased both by consumptive coagulopathy and by acquired platelet dysfunction in the setting of high shear stress in case of MCS use. Use of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors was also found on multivariate testing to be a statistically significant predictor of bleeding. Bleeding was associated with a significantly higher mortality at 30 days (hazard ratio [HR] 2.11, 95% CI: 1.63-2.75; p<0.0001) and, when patients with only severe bleeding events were compared to those without, the HR was even higher (HR 2.80, 95% CI: 1.94-4.05; p<0.0001).

Trials in non-CS patients with bleeding demonstrated that a restrictive transfusion regimen can improve outcome. Generally accepted ICU strategies avoid correction of haemoglobin levels >7 g/dl (>4.3 mmol/l) unless there is a clinical bleeding problem. Transfusion of stored blood serves, on top of the pre-existing systemic inflammatory state in CS, as a source of further inflammation, with alterations in normal nitric oxide biology contributing to vasoconstriction, platelet aggregation and impaired oxygen delivery.
Target temperature management is part of standard of care in OHCA and should therefore be a basic element in the treatment of CS patients suffering cardiac arrest. However, there is little clinical trial evidence in the CS case itself. Theoretical assumptions suggested a possible beneficial effect of hypothermia in non-resuscitated CS patients; this was not borne out in the SHOCK-COOL trial including 40 patients. In fact, lactate clearance was found to be impaired, suggesting even harm
63.

A detailed description of mechanical complications is beyond the scope of this review and has been summarised previously
64. However, given the presence of moderate or greater mitral regurgitation in 5-10% of patients with CS, of note is some recent work on percutaneous mitral valve repair (PMVr) using edge-to-edge repair as salvage therapy in patients with mitral regurgitation and refractory CS. A recent multicentre pooled patient-level systematic review looked at 141 patients at 14 institutions who presented with SCAI stage B-E CS and 3+ or 4+ mitral regurgitation - not necessarily as a consequence of AMI - and were treated with PMVr
65. No periprocedural complications were reported; successful PMVr was achieved in about 89% of cases. When stratified by procedural results, successful PMVr reduced rates of in-hospital (HR 0.36, 95% CI: 0.13-0.98; p=0.04) and 90-day mortality (HR 0.36, 95% CI: 0.16-0.78; p=0.01).

Although the theoretical concept of MCS is appealing, in terms of reducing the dependency on inotropes/vasopressors while the heart is bridged to recovery or decision, at present there exist only limited data derived from RCT based on clinical outcomes.
Despite decades of familiarity with the IABP, only in recent years has conclusive evidence established a lack of benefit in AMI-CS. The IABP-SHOCK II trial randomised 600 patients with AMI-CS to early revascularisation with or without IABP
6. No difference in the primary study endpoint of 30-day mortality was noted, or in terms of any of the trial’s secondary endpoints. Longer-term follow-up, up to six years, clarified that these results were sustained, and that they held for the intention-to-treat as well as for the as-treated group
66
67. Thus, nowadays IABP may only be considered for the mechanical complications group (III B recommendation without and IIb C recommendation in the setting of mechanical complication)
35
36
51.

The neutral results of IABP-SHOCK II together with the downgrading in guidelines led to a decrease in IABP use to <30% in the USA
68, <10% in Germany
69, and <2% in Denmark
70, respectively. The decline in IABP use was associated with an increase of active MCS including Impella/TandemHeart™ (LivaNova, London, United Kingdom) and VA-ECMO in CS from approximately 1% in 2006 to 8% in 2014 in the USA
68. Similarly, VA-ECMO implementation has developed towards a routine procedure with a more than eightfold increase in Germany from 2010 to 2015
71
72.

The mechanism of action of various MCS devices has been outlined previously
18
73. New developments include the Impella ECP (expandable CP) device with the ability to achieve peak flows >3.5 L/min despite only requiring access though a 9 Fr sheath. It is unsheathed in the descending aorta and expands to approximately 18 Fr. When being removed, it is first resheathed back down to 9 Fr.
Figure 2 shows the currently available devices, including a brief overview of technical features and unloading properties on the left and/or right ventricle.


Schematic drawings of current percutaneous mechanical support devices for cardiogenic shock with technical features. On the left side are devices for right ventricular support and on the right side those for left ventricular support. a) Impella RP. b) TandemHeart RA-PA (right atrium – pulmonary artery). c) VA extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). d) Intra-aortic balloon pump. e) Microaxial devices: including new development of Impella ECP and Thoratec PHP. f) TandemHeart.
Randomised data on clinical outcomes with regard to the use of percutaneous MCS devices in CS are still limited
(Figure 3A). A meta-analysis of active MCS devices against control showed no difference in mortality for the 148 included patients. There were improvements in arterial lactate and MAP after device insertion. On the other hand, there were no effects on other haemodynamic parameters and, more importantly, haemodynamic effects were counterbalanced by significantly more bleeding complications
60. A more recent small (n=15) trial in AMI-CS (IMPELLA-STIC) attempted to assess the potential additional benefit of Impella 5.0 LP in patients already managed with an IABP
74. There was no difference in the primary endpoint, change in cardiac power index at 12 hours. Adverse events, especially major bleeding, were common in the Impella + IABP group (0% vs 71.4%).


Enrolment data for major randomised cardiogenic shock trials. A) Number of patients included in major randomised cardiogenic shock trials including the primary endpoint (EP). Blue bars indicate finalised trials. In parentheses is the clinicaltrials.gov number if available. Data last accessed (on clinicaltrials.gov) 22 October 2020. B) Number of patients included in major randomised cardiogenic shock trials. Red bars indicate ongoing or planned randomised trials. In parentheses is the clinicaltrials.gov number if available. Data last accessed (on clinicaltrials.gov) 22 October 2020. Acronyms and tested strategy of ongoing or planned randomised trials: ACCOST-HH: Adrecizumab vs placebo in cardiogenic shock. Altshock-2: IABP within six hours of onset of cardiogenic shock versus standard of care (no device) in cardiogenic shock. ANCHOR: VA-ECMO under echo guidance via the femoral route, with IABP in the contralateral femoral artery versus standard management of cardiogenic shock (i.e., no devices) complicating myocardial infarction. COCCA: low dose corticosteroid therapy (hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone) versus placebo in cardiogenic shock. DanGer: Impella CP versus control in cardiogenic shock complicating myocardial infarction. DAPT-SHOCK-AMI: Multicentre randomised double-blind trial comparing intravenous cangrelor and oral ticagrelor in patients with acute myocardial infarction complicated by initial cardiogenic shock and treated with primary angioplasty. ECLS-SHOCK: VA-ECMO versus control in severe cardiogenic shock complicating myocardial infarction. ECLS-SHOCK: Extracorporeal life support and revascularisation versus revascularisation alone in patients with severe infarct related cardiogenic shock. ECMO-CS: VA-ECMO versus control in cardiogenic shock complicating myocardial infarction. ECMO-RRT: VA-ECMO plus routine renal replacement therapy versus VA-ECMO and standard of care in cardiogenic shock. EURO-SHOCK: VA-ECMO versus control in cardiogenic shock complicating myocardial infarction. HEMO-ECMO: Simultaneous haemoperfusion with ECMO versus ECMO alone for cardiogenic shock. HYPO-ECMO: VA-ECMO with moderate hypothermia versus VA-ECMO with normothermia in cardiogenic shock. IABP pre Revasc: IABP pre revascularisation versus control in cardiogenic shock complicating acute myocardial infarction. LevoHeartShock: Levosimendan in addition to conventional strategy versus placebo in addition to conventional strategy in cardiogenic shock. PRAGUE OHCA: VA-ECMO versus control in refractory out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. REVERSE: VA-ECMO with Impella CP versus VA-ECMO alone in cardiogenic shock. Ivabradine in CS: Ivabradine vs placebo initiated 3 hrs after dobutamine in patients with cardiogenic shock/stage D heart failure who require dobutamine and whose HR is >100. Note that ACS patients are excluded from this study. EVOLVE-ECMO: In patients with CS on ECMO, initiation of percutaneous LA venting via septal puncture when B-lines detected on lung ultrasound, versus when refractory pulmonary oedema is detected on chest radiograph and/or inadequate LV opening detected on echocardiography. LVVI adjusted dobutamine: initiate dobutamine at 5 mcg/kg/min and adjust according to the ejection volume index versus initiate dobutamine at 5 mcg/kg/min and adjust according to the attending physician in patients with an EF documented at <40% and cardiogenic shock. Note that ACS patients are excluded from this study. TS-CS-OOHCA: Anti-inflammatory effect of therapeutic hypothermia in out of hospital cardiac arrest patients with cardiogenic shock. CPC: cerebral performance category; EP: endpoint; Heart replacement therapy: heart transplant or left ventricular assist device implantation; MACE: major adverse cardiac events; RRT: renal replacement therapy

In the setting of a lack of sufficient data from RCT, matched comparisons provide the best second option evidence. A matched-pair mortality analysis of 237 Impella-treated versus 237 IABP-treated AMI-CS patients confirmed a lack of mortality benefit with the Impella device (30-day mortality 48.5% vs 46.4%, p=0.64)
75. Of note, severe or life-threatening bleeding (8.5% vs 3.0%, p<0.01) and peripheral vascular complications (9.8% vs 3.8%, p=0.01) were observed more frequently with the Impella device. A second propensity-matched analysis, involving 1,680 pairs of AMI-CS patients, added further weight to this observation, actually suggesting potential harm with the use of Impella rather than IABP
76. Among the pairs, there was a significantly higher risk of in-hospital death associated with use of Impella versus IABP (absolute risk difference 10.9%, 95% CI: 7.6-14.2%; p<0.001) and a higher risk of in-hospital major bleeding (absolute risk difference 15.4%, 95% CI: 12.5-18.2%; p<0.001). These associations were consistent regardless of whether patients received a device before or after initiation of PCI.

A third recent publication assessed 4,782 patients undergoing PCI treated with MCS in the USA
77. CS was present in 50%. After propensity adjustment, and accounting for clustering of patients by hospitals, Impella use compared to IABP was associated with an increased risk of death (OR 1.24, 95% CI: 1.13-1.36), bleeding (OR 1.10, 95% CI: 1.00-1.21) and stroke (OR 1.34, 95% CI: 1.18-1.53). Interestingly, patients treated by Impella in comparison to IABP were less sick. Thus, a selection bias inherent to any observational data is less likely to be the cause of higher mortality with the Impella device.

Taken together, these results suggest that very careful patient selection for Impella is warranted, particularly in terms of weighing up the haemodynamic benefits against potential device-related complications. Due to the retrospective and non-randomised nature of these studies, it is possible, even allowing for complex statistical propensity matching, that unmeasured confounding is occurring. The DanGer clinical trial (NCT01633502), currently ongoing, with the aim of recruiting 360 participants with STEMI complicated by CS and randomising them to either treatment with the Impella CP or conventional guideline-driven treatment, may shed some additional light on the role of Impella
78. The trial protocol stipulates that the device should be placed prior to PCI and has a hard clinical endpoint of all-cause mortality. Patients with OHCA who remain comatose after return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) are excluded. Over 200 patients have been included to date. Patients recruited thus far are profoundly unwell, with 100% of patients having a lactate >2.5 mmol/L and median LVEF 20%. This trial will provide valuable information on this difficult-to-treat cohort but may limit generalisability to the entire CS spectrum because usually 50% of CS patients have undergone resuscitation.

In initial iterations, surgical insertion of ECMO was associated with substantial complications such as lower extremity ischaemia (16.9%), compartment syndrome (10.3%), amputation (4.7%), stroke (5.9%), major bleeding (40.8%), and significant infections (30.4%)
62. The development of miniaturised systems and percutaneous cannula insertion has led to a significant uptake of VA-ECMO by interventional cardiologists for CS treatment. It offers the advantages of low costs in comparison to other percutaneous MCS devices, high flow providing full circulatory support even in resuscitation situations, the ability to provide full oxygenation, and also combined support of the right and left ventricle.

Outcome data on VA-ECMO in CS remain relatively sparse. A significant mortality benefit with VA-ECMO use has been shown in a single meta-analysis, which relied only on four small observational studies
79. In CS without ongoing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), VA-ECMO resulted in a 33% higher 30-day survival compared to control (95% CI: 14-52%; p<0.001; number needed to treat 3)
79.

A single small RCT (n=42) has assessed the efficacy of VA-ECMO in AMI-CS in terms of left ventricular recovery at 30 days
80. Left ventricular ejection fraction at 30 days was not found to be significantly different amongst surviving patients in the VA-ECMO and control groups (p=0.86). All-cause 30-day mortality was low and not different between groups, questioning the inclusion of severe AMI-CS patients (19% VA-ECMO vs 33% control, p=0.37).

Currently, further RCT to assess VA-ECMO in the setting of AMI-CS are in the early or more advanced phase of patient recruitment
(Figure 3B). These trials are adequately powered and most use 30-day mortality as the primary endpoint. Among them, the ECLS-SHOCK trial (NCT03637205) currently has the highest number of enrolled patients (>160)
81. It only includes high-risk CS patients after AMI with lactate >3 mmol/l and recommends VA-ECMO insertion before revascularisation. In addition, it has a dedicated protocol for ECMO venting and also an escalation strategy in the non-ECMO arm. In contrast, the EURO-SHOCK trial (approximately 10 AMI-CS patients so far) (NCT03813134) has no protocol-defined venting strategy and specifies the addition of ECMO post rather than pre PCI
82. The ANCHOR trial (NCT04184635) is still in the planning phase and will combine VA-ECMO with IABP in comparison to control (n=400). A major problem of this trial is the chosen primary study endpoint of death in the ECMO group and death or rescue ECMO in the control group. The allowance of crossover in the control arm will make interpretation of trial results difficult. The ECMO-CS trial (NCT02301819) is only powered to assess a composite endpoint of death, resuscitated cardiac arrest and implantation of another mechanical circulatory device, rather than mortality directly. Until more data are available, thorough consideration must be given to identifying appropriate candidates for VA-ECMO support to avoid unnecessary use, which might consume resources and expose patients to possible complications.

A common issue related to peripheral cannula insertion is an increase in afterload which may lead to inadequate left ventricular unloading. Multiple venting manoeuvres have been described to prevent volume overload such as combining VA-ECMO with IABP, Impella, atrial septostomy, or other
(Figure 4).


Left: considerations on potential surgical or percutaneous approaches to unload the left ventricle in the setting of venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Right: venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and upgrades in cardiogenic shock and lung failure. A) Conventional set-up of venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation circuit consisting of venous and arterial femoral cannula with distal perfusion catheter. B) ECMELLA (venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and Impella). C) Venoarteriovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation configuration with a second cannula originating as Y-configuration from the arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation system to jugular vein. D) Simplified venoarteriovenous-extracorporeal membrane oxygenation configuration with a bypass from distal perfusion catheter to both lumens of jugular Shaldon catheter. E) Venoarterial-pulmonary arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation with an additional cannula positioned in the pulmonary artery. F) Venoarteriovenous-extracorporeal membrane oxygenation configuration in combination with Impella. Adapted from Lüsebrink et al
86, with permission from Oxford University Press.

A recently published multicentre cohort study assessed whether venting in patients with VA-ECMO was associated with lower mortality
83. Patients (n=225) with severe CS treated with VA-ECMO and Impella unloading (ECMELLA) were propensity matched with 225 patients treated with VA-ECMO without Impella. Left ventricular unloading was associated with lower 30-day mortality (HR 0.79, 95% CI: 0.63-0.98; p=0.03) without differences in various subgroups. However, complications were noted to occur more frequently in the venting cohort, specifically severe bleeding (HR 2.87, 95% CI: 1.92-4.35; p<0.01) and access site-related ischaemia (HR 1.96, 95% CI: 1.22-3.20; p<0.01).

This study is in agreement with previous meta-analyses which have also shown a mortality benefit with unloading VA-ECMO. Russo et al identified 17 observational studies which included 3,997 patients receiving a concomitant LV unloading strategy while on VA-ECMO (IABP 91.7%, percutaneous ventricular assist device 5.5%, pulmonary vein or transseptal left atrial cannulation 2.8%)
84. Mortality was 60% in the total cohort. The risk ratio (RR) for mortality was lower in those with venting than in those without (RR 0.79, 95% CI: 0.72-0.87; p<0.00001). There was no interaction between the specific unloading modalities and mortality. Kowalewski et al conducted a similar meta-analysis, including 7,581 patients from 62 observational studies
85. An unloading strategy was associated with a lower mortality risk (RR 0.88, 95% CI: 0.82-0.93; p<0.0001) and higher probability of VA-ECMO weaning (RR 1.35, 95% CI: 1.21-1.51; p<0.00001). A recent review article summarises all aspects of unloading in VA-ECMO use
86.

In the special situation of cardiac arrest with ongoing CPR, VA-ECMO use (ECMO cardiopulmonary resuscitation [eCPR]) was associated with an absolute 13% increase of 30-day survival compared to control (95% CI: 6-20%; p<0.001; number needed to treat 7.7) in the above-mentioned meta-analysis
79. At present, the Prague out-of-Hospital Cardiac Arrest trial (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01511666), assessing eCPR in refractory OHCA, is ongoing, and powered to assess superiority with regard to mortality (with good neurological outcomes) at six months.

Appropriate patient selection for MCS remains a key consideration. Based on IABP-SHOCK II, approximately 50-60% of CS patients survive without any device
8. In these patients, device utilisation will have no impact on survival and, in the worst case scenario, may lead to complications associated with device insertion, up to and including death. Among the 40-50% not surviving, there may also be futile situations for patients with severe CS or those with anoxic brain injury, where even the best available device will be unable to change the ultimate clinical outcome. Thus, we conclude that it may be estimated that there is a key kernel of only approximately 25% of CS patients who are, in fact, appropriate candidates for MCS. Those factors best identifying the members of this group remain to be fully elucidated.

Appropriate patient selection is also influenced by the balance between efficacy, institutional experience, and device-related complications. Particularly in terms of the data on Impella, the key determinant of overall clinical benefit seems to be the balance of increased haemodynamic support versus the risk of bleeding complications. The availability of the Impella ECP may alter this dynamic, given the smaller sheath size needed to facilitate its entry. However, this remains to be seen and needs to be borne out in RCT.
Current guidelines recommend considering the use of percutaneous MCS in selected patients depending on age, comorbidities, and neurological function in particular, in refractory CS without any preference for device selection (IIa C recommendation)
35
36
51. It is important to note that the recommendation for the use of MCS only in the setting of “refractory shock” is based on limited available evidence where it is possible that the initiation of MCS at this point may, at least in some cases, be too late. The optimal timing of initiation of MCS remains a matter of debate, and has often been left to the discretion of the operator in randomised trials. Results from registry studies are conflicting, with some showing a benefit
87
88
89
90
91, whereas other larger analyses have even shown harm with pre-revascularisation insertion of Impella
76.

In terms of the role for complete revascularisation versus culprit-only PCI specifically in the setting of MCS-supported revascularisation, registry data suggest - in contrast to the large-scale randomised CULPRIT-SHOCK trial - no significant differences in survival and rates of acute kidney injury. However, if anything, this is only hypothesis-generating based on the non-randomised evidence
92. Overall, it appears that, as in non-CS STEMI, rapid diagnosis and initiation of treatment are critical, but formal RCT are required to clarify the findings to date, particularly for the case of Impella in light of the disparate data outlined above.

In general, RCT are difficult to perform in the CS setting and, to date, only a small number of trials have managed to recruit the required number of patients to assess key clinical outcomes. Furthermore, despite the proliferation of primary PCI networks and advances in antiplatelet and antithrombotic pharmacology, the 30-day mortality rate of CS has changed little. There is hope on the horizon, however, with more clinical trials than ever actively recruiting (Figure 3B), with the aim of clarifying the role of pharmacology and MCS. Especially with regard to Impella (DanGer), levosimendan (LevoHeartShock) and VA-ECMO (ECLS-SHOCK, EURO-SHOCK, ANCHOR), it is hoped that we will soon have more data to clarify the best management approach and that these data may lead to an improvement in short- and long-term outcomes.
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
acute myocardial infarction
Bleeding Academic Research Consortium
confidence interval
cardiac intensive care unit
cardiogenic shock
extracorporeal life support
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation combined with Impella support
ECMO-assisted cardiopulmonary resuscitation
hazard ratio
intra-aortic balloon pump
intensive care unit
left ventricular assist device
mean arterial pressure
mechanical circulatory support
multiorgan dysfunction syndrome
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest
odds ratio
pulmonary artery pulsatility index
percutaneous mitral valve repair
randomised controlled trial
relative risk/risk ratio
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions
ST-elevation myocardial infarction
veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
Holger Thiele, Heart Center Leipzig at University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany; Leipzig Heart Institute, Leipzig, Germany.
Suzanne de Waha-Thiele, University Heart Center Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany.
Anne Freund, Heart Center Leipzig at University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany; Leipzig Heart Institute, Leipzig, Germany.
Uwe Zeymer, Klinikum Ludwigshafen, Ludwigshafen, Germany.
Steffen Desch, Heart Center Leipzig at University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany; Leipzig Heart Institute, Leipzig, Germany.
Sean Fitzgerald, Heart Center Leipzig at University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
Articles from EuroIntervention are provided here courtesy of Europa Group

==================================================

Title: Mixed Cardiogenic-Vasodilatory Shock
Authors: Saraschandra Vallabhajosyula, Jacob C Jentzer, Meshe D Chonde, Andrea Elliott, Garima Dahiya, David D Berg, Penelope Rampersad, Seife Yohannes, Alexander G Truesdell, Shashank S Sinha
Organizations: 
aDepartment of Cardiovascular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA, 
bCardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA, 
cDepartment of Cardiology, Smidt Heart Institute, Cedars Sinai, Los Angeles, California, USA, 
dDivision of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA, 
eDepartment of Cardiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA, 
fDepartment of Cardiology, NYU Langone Health, New York, New York, USA, 
gInova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, Virginia, USA, 
gInova Schar Heart and Vascular, Inova Fairfax Medical Campus, Falls Church, Virginia, USA, 
hDepartment of Critical Care Medicine, Medstar Washington Hospital Center, Washington DC, USA
Text:
This state-of-the-art review describes the potential etiologies, pathophysiology, and management of mixed shock in the context of a proposed novel classification system. Cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock occurs when cardiogenic shock is complicated by inappropriate vasodilation, impairing compensatory mechanisms, and contributing to worsening shock. Vasodilatory-cardiogenic shock occurs when vasodilatory shock is complicated by myocardial dysfunction, resulting in low cardiac output. Primary mixed shock occurs when a systemic insult triggers both myocardial dysfunction and vasoplegia. Regardless of the etiology of mixed shock, the hemodynamic profile can be similar, and outcomes tend to be poor. Identification and treatment of both the initial and complicating disease processes is essential along with invasive hemodynamic monitoring given the evolving nature of mixed shock states. Hemodynamic support typically involves a combination of inotropes and vasopressors, with few data available to guide the use of mechanical circulatory support. Consensus definitions and novel treatment strategies are needed for this dangerous condition.
Key words: cardiac arrest, cardiac intensive care unit, cardiogenic shock, myocardial infarction, sepsis, shock

Mixed cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock is common in the contemporary cardiac intensive care unit.
Patients can develop mixed shock from a primary cardiac, vascular, or systemic cardiovascular insult.
Support of cardiac output and systemic vascular resistance is needed to treat mixed shock.
Further research is needed to identify disease-modifying therapies for mixed shock to improve outcomes.
Patients with circulatory shock are divided into three primary hemodynamic phenotypes, namely hypovolemic, vasodilatory/distributive, and cardiogenic (including obstructive).1 Cardiogenic shock (CS) is a complex clinical syndrome characterized by end-organ hypoperfusion owing to a primary cardiac insult resulting in impaired cardiac output (CO).1, 2, 3 Traditional pathophysiologic models of CS predict that acute reductions in CO should lead to neurohormonal activation and compensatory systemic vasoconstriction to maintain mean arterial pressure (MAP), resulting in the classic CS hemodynamic profile with elevated systemic vascular resistance (SVR).1, 2, 3 However, CS is a hemodynamically diverse syndrome and SVR can vary widely in patients with CS.4, 5, 6, 7, 8 Accordingly, it has long been recognized that a subgroup of patients with CS displays inappropriately low SVR.2, 3, 4,9 The hemodynamic profile of depressed CO and inappropriate systemic vasodilation has been termed mixed shock to indicate the combined features of both cardiogenic and vasodilatory shock.2,3 Mixed shock is a heterogeneous syndrome with numerous etiologic drivers and variable clinical trajectories unified by a common clinical and hemodynamic profile. The Shock Academic Research Consortium describes mixed shock as a “high-risk, understudied subpopulation of patients with CS,” functioning as a modifier for the 4 primary categories of CS.3 In this review, we will discuss the current definitions, epidemiology, pathophysiology, classification, evaluation, and management of mixed cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock in the context of a new proposed classification system.
To date, there is no uniform, evidence-based definition of mixed shock. Conceptually, mixed cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock may be pragmatically defined as hypotension with end-organ hypoperfusion (ie, overt shock) occurring in the context of both acute cardiac insufficiency and systemic vasodilation. The typical hemodynamic pattern of mixed shock includes the triad of low CO, low SVR, and normal or elevated ventricular filling pressures (Table 1); however, clinically relevant thresholds for these 3 diagnostic criteria remain ill-defined.2,3 In primary CS, hypoperfusion generally correlates with a cardiac index < 2.2 L/min/m2, which is a commonly used diagnostic threshold in the absence of vasopressors, inotropes, or temporary mechanical circulatory support (MCS).2, 3, 4 The pulmonary artery catheter (PAC) is the gold standard for diagnosis of mixed shock, allowing direct measurement and calculation of all relevant hemodynamic parameters and defining mixed shock is difficult without invasive hemodynamic monitoring. Once the CO is measured or estimated, SVR can be calculated based on the MAP—a low SVR has been defined as <700 dyn/cm/s-5 (normal 800-1,200 dyn/cm/s-5), but must be interpreted in the context of vasoactive drug support (ie, a normal SVR during vasopressor therapy may reflect inappropriate vasodilation).2, 3, 4, 5,8 Because a high SVR is typical of CS, it could be argued that mixed shock is present in any patient with CS who continues to require high vasopressor doses to maintain a normal MAP and SVR after restoration of a normal CO using inotropes and/or temporary MCS.8
Potential Diagnostic Criteria for Mixed Shock
LVOT = left ventricular outflow tract; MCS = mechanical circulatory support; SVO2 = venous oxygen saturation.
The 3 clinical features that define the mixed shock phenotype are low cardiac output, vasodilation, and adequate preload/congestion. These can each be identified using various evaluation modalities.
Physical examination findings in mixed shock may be contradictory and must be interpreted in the context of the primary shock phenotype.
Patients can arrive at a mixed shock state through several pathways, often starting with a primary insult causing shock followed by activation of secondary pathophysiological mechanisms or development of an intercurrent disease process. By analogy to the taxonomy of cardiorenal syndromes, we herein delineate a conceptual model that categorizes mixed shock into 3 principal groups, each defined by the sequence and nature of the insult (ie, primary versus secondary hemodynamic process): cardiogenic-vasodilatory, vasodilatory-cardiogenic, and primary mixed shock (Figure 1). The cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock group includes those patients who initially have CS (primary pathology) and subsequently develop pathologic vasodilation (secondary insult), classically patients with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) CS who develop inflammatory vasodilation. The vasodilatory-CS group includes those patients who initially have vasodilatory shock (primary pathology) and subsequently develop cardiac compromise with low output (secondary insult), for example, patients with septic shock who develop severe sepsis-induced cardiomyopathy (SICM). The primary mixed shock group includes those patients who have a single primary insult that compromises both cardiac (ie, low CO) and vascular (ie, vasoplegia) function, such as patients with postcardiac arrest syndrome (PCAS) causing myocardial dysfunction and vasodilation. Patients in the cardiogenic-vasodilatory and vasodilatory-CS categories have 2 distinct pathophysiologic mechanisms or disease processes (ie, a “two-hit” model), whereas those with primary mixed shock have a single insult that produces both myocardial dysfunction and vasodilation, either simultaneously or sequentially (Central Illustration). While we describe the distinctions between these proposed subgroups as concrete for the purposes of illustration, they may overlap substantially and be difficult to cleanly distinguish in clinical practice and research.

Proposed Classification of Mixed Shock
Patients are classified based on the primary (inciting) shock phenotype and the secondary (complicating) process in a “two-hit” model. This model is conceptual, recognizing that there may be overlap between groups and it may not be possible to clinically classify patients who present late during mixed shock. HF = heart failure; MCS = mechanical circulatory support; SIRS = systemic inflammatory response syndrome.

Conceptual Model of Mixed Shock Etiology and Pathogenesis
Abbreviation as in Figure 2.
Patients with cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock have a primary cardiac disease process resulting in low CO and prototypical CS, and then subsequently develop inappropriately low vascular tone resulting in mixed shock. The defining criterion of this group is the initial development of pure CS with later development of vasodilation and mixed shock, recognizing that patients may present late to medical care with established mixed shock. Inappropriate vasodilation causing cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock counteracts the compensatory neurohormonal response and therapeutic response to vasopressors resulting in a maladaptive reduction in SVR and progressive hypotension in CS.2,4,10 The development of inappropriate vasodilation often represents an inflection point in the clinical course of CS, with delayed clinical worsening and initiation of the downward spiral which will progress to refractory shock with poor outcome if not addressed promptly.2,4 The greater the severity of CS, the more likely that mixed shock is present (particularly in refractory Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions stage E CS).11, 12, 13, 14, 15
Any condition causing CS can potentially evolve into mixed cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock from intercurrent infection or through noninfectious inflammatory disease mechanisms potentially aggravated by vasodilatory effects of medications.3 AMI serves as a prototypical example whereby acute myocardial injury causes pump failure and triggers a systemic inflammatory response provoking vasoplegia.4,16 Mirroring the overall epidemiology of CS, AMI and decompensated heart failure are the usual causes of mixed cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock.17,18 Acute myocarditis may present with an initial low-output state, but if excessive systemic inflammation occurs then cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock can occur, providing a clear link between inflammation and simultaneous cardiac and vascular dysfunction which may overlap with primary mixed shock.
A seminal report from the SHOCK (Should We Emergently Revascularize Occluded Coronaries for Cardiogenic Shock) trial demonstrated that approximately 1 in 6 patients with AMI-CS had a low SVR (ie, <700 dyn/cm/s−5) reflecting mixed shock with systemic vasodilation despite use of vasopressor therapy.5 Baldetti et al found that 1 in 4 patients who initially had “pure” CS subsequently developed mixed shock (vasodilation and systemic inflammation) after a median of 5 days, and these patients were sicker with higher mortality; predictors of developing mixed shock included lower systolic pressure, liver injury, and infection.19 In an analysis from the Critical Care Cardiology Trials Network registry, physician-assigned mixed shock accounted for 20% of all shock cases treated in tertiary care cardiac intensive care units (CICUs).17 Compared to patients with pure CS, mixed CS patients had worse indices of acute illness severity, including more systemic hypoperfusion and end-organ dysfunction, resulting in more intensive care unit resource utilization, longer CICU stays, and higher in-hospital mortality.17 In a separate Critical Care Cardiology Trials Network analysis evaluating the prognostic significance of hemodynamic parameters in CS, low MAP and SVR were strongly associated with worse in-hospital mortality (whereas cardiac index itself was not), underscoring the adverse prognostic implications of the mixed CS phenotype.7 In a large single-center cohort of patients with CS by Chavez et al8, a low SVR (<800 dyn/cm/s−5) was present in 19% and incrementally associated with higher mortality. These authors defined “blunted pressor response” as either low SVR (<800 dyn/cm/s−5) while on vasopressors (present in 17%) or normal SVR (800-1,200 dyn/cm/s−5) while on high doses of vasopressors (>0.2 μg/kg/min norepinephrine; present in 9%); patients with CS and blunted pressor response had higher mortality.8
The systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) is a nonspecific physiologic response to any major systemic infectious or noninfectious stressor that has been associated with higher disease severity and worse survival in acute cardiovascular disease.9,11,16 Criteria for SIRS are met in up to one-third of all CICU patients on admission, especially those with CS or cardiac arrest.9,11,16,20 Although SIRS often occurs without documented infection (“sterile SIRS”), patients with cardiac critical illness are at increased risk of infection.21 A neutrophilic leukocytosis is typical of patients with CS, and patients with CS often have elevated markers of systemic inflammation, making it challenging to separate infected and uninfected individuals.11,15,18,22, 23, 24 Among patients in the CICU, diagnoses of sepsis are increasingly common, predisposing to development of mixed shock.25,26 Sepsis is a common complication or comorbid condition for patients with CS, reported at 15% to 20% or more in clinical trials and observational studies, being associated with higher mortality.9,17,18,27,28 An analysis from the Mayo Clinic reported concomitant admission diagnoses of both CS and sepsis in 15% of CICU patients with shock, and these patients had higher illness severity, greater severity of shock, and worse survival.18
CS occurs when contractile failure of the heart results in reduced CO with subsequent systemic hypoperfusion and hypotension (Figure 2).2,4 This triggers sympathetic and neurohormonal activation with resultant compensatory tachycardia and peripheral vasoconstriction to restore CO and MAP, initially preserving organ perfusion at the expense of increased myocardial afterload and oxygen demand. Congestion aggravates myocardial dysfunction (by increasing wall tension and provoking valvular regurgitation) and organ hypoperfusion (by reducing the perfusion pressure gradient within the organs).2,4,29 Maladaptive vasodilation drives the transition from pure CS to mixed cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock by interfering with the compensatory vasoconstriction necessary to maintain adequate organ perfusion.2,4, 5, 6, 7

Pathophysiological Pathways in Mixed Cardiogenic-Vasodilatory Shock, Including Classical Mechanisms of Typical Cardiogenic Shock and Established Mechanisms of Mixed Shock
Mixed shock commonly arises when tissue injury triggers a systemic inflammatory response, resulting in maladaptive vasodilation, microcirculatory dysfunction, and worsening myocardial dysfunction. ABG = arterial blood gas; CRP = C-reactive protein; LFT = liver function test; LV = left ventricular; LVEDP = left ventricular end-diastolic pressure; ROS = reactive oxygen species; SVR = systemic vascular resistance; TNF = tumor necrosis factor; other abbreviations as in Figure 1.
Systemic inflammation is a key pathophysiologic mechanism that drives pathogenic vasoplegia, refractory shock, and adverse outcomes in CS (Figure 2).2,4 Indeed, Baldetti et al defined development of mixed shock in patients who initially had “pure” CS as the development of vasodilation (“distributive hemodynamics”) in combination with evidence of systemic inflammation.19 The inflammatory response is initiated via activation of leukocyte toll-like receptors by binding damage-associated molecular patterns, which are derived from damaged host cells, and pathogen-associated molecular pattern, which are derived from microbial cells (eg, endotoxins).10 Potential triggers include infection, cardiomyocyte necrosis from AMI, PCAS, tissue ischemia, allogenic blood product transfusion, and gut translocation of bacterial endotoxins due to loss of mucosal integrity or mesenteric ischemia; exposure of the blood to prosthetic materials during MCS, particularly venoarterial (VA) extracorporeal membrane oxygenator (ECMO), is another important trigger.2,10,30, 31, 32, 33 Inflammatory cytokines and downstream pro-inflammatory targets such as various interleukins, tumor necrosis factor-α, C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, thrombomodulin, vascular adhesion molecules, circulating neutrophils, and complement are elevated in CS (particularly AMI-CS) and confer an increased risk of mortality.10,11,15,18,22, 23, 24,34, 35, 36, 37
Regardless of the trigger, the systemic inflammatory response can produce uncontrolled vasodilation through cytokine-driven excessive inducible nitric oxide synthase (NOS) activation resulting in toxic levels of nitric oxide (NO), which produces vasoplegia, microvascular dysfunction, oxidative stress, and abnormal mitochondrial oxygen utilization.2,4,10,32,38, 39, 40 Endothelial dysfunction and microvascular dysfunction may aggravate tissue hypoperfusion and result in capillary leak and compromised tissue perfusion despite restoration of acceptable macrohemodynamic parameters.10,39 Abnormalities of the microcirculation are increasingly recognized as important contributors to the pathogenesis of both CS and septic shock and thus presumably contribute strongly to vasoplegia and organ injury in mixed shock.41 An inadequate vascular response to catecholamines (either endogenous or exogenous) is a central mechanism contributing to vasoplegia via acidemia, reduction of intracellular calcium, elevated intracellular cyclic guanosine monophosphate/cyclic adenosine monophosphate levels and activation of adenosine triphosphate-sensitive potassium channels.40 As in critically ill patients with sepsis, nearly one-third of patients with CS may develop critical illness-related corticosteroid insufficiency; relative deficiencies of vasopressin and angiotensin-II have been proposed in septic shock and might potentially contribute to refractory vasoplegia in mixed cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock.40,42,43 Sedative and analgesic medications commonly used for mechanically ventilated patients have vasodilatory and cardioinhibitory properties that can induce or aggravate a mixed shock state, as can guideline-directed medical therapies for heart failure.3 Finally, metabolic derangements from sustained organ hypoperfusion can compromise myocardial and vascular function, impairing the response to vasoactive medications; this has been termed hemo-metabolic shock.12,14,44,45
Mixed vasodilatory-CS develops when a patient with a primary vasodilatory/distributive shock phenotype develops cardiac compromise. Sepsis stands as the quintessential cause of vasodilatory shock and may have infectious origins or noninfectious mimics.46 Numerous other less common causes of vasodilatory/distributive shock that can progress to mixed vasodilatory-CS exist, including anaphylaxis and adverse drug reactions. Patients with sepsis as the primary pathology can develop low CO as a secondary insult through a multitude of pathways, resulting in vasodilatory-CS.47,48 Initially, patients present with systemic vasodilation and subsequently develop signs of cardiac dysfunction indicative of low CO due to inability of the cardiovascular system to compensate for the increased demand associated with the septic state or development of an acute cardiomyopathic process.
Patients with pre-existing heart disease, such as cardiomyopathy or severe valvular heart disease, may be relatively compensated at baseline but deteriorate after fluid loading and systemic stress, becoming unable to maintain a normal CO during the sepsis state. New cardiac dysfunction can occur via SICM, demand ischemia (ie, type 2 AMI), stress cardiomyopathy (apical ballooning/takotsubo syndrome), or development of new valve lesions (ie, infective endocarditis).47,49 Patients with hyperdynamic sepsis or stress-induced cardiomyopathy can develop inducible left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) or mid-cavity obstruction resulting in low CO despite preserved left ventricular ejection fraction.47,49 For most patients, SICM does not lead to mixed vasodilatory-CS, and objective evidence of inappropriately low CO should be present to define the mixed shock syndrome. Infective endocarditis is a unique cause of mixed vasodilatory-CS, whereby an initial septic shock can be complicated by CS due to valvular destruction. Mixed vasodilatory-CS may arise in severe systemic infections where direct viral myocardial injury, hypoxia-induced myocardial dysfunction, systemic inflammation, microvascular thrombosis, and endothelial dysfunction converge, causing both cardiogenic and vasodilatory shock components.
SICM involves reversible myocardial dysfunction occurring among patients with sepsis, with a variable prevalence of up to 60%.47,50 There are multiple potential manifestations (phenotypes) of SICM, each of which has distinct epidemiology and prognosis. However, the prevalence of true mixed cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock in septic patients is not well-defined and most patients with SICM have preserved CO.47 In one recent study, 10% of patients with septic shock had a low cardiac index (defined as <1.85 L/min/m2), and a U-shaped relationship was observed between cardiac index and short-term mortality.51 Classic SICM includes transient left ventricular (LV) dilation and/or systolic dysfunction, which is common (up to 60%) and might represent an adaptive response to maintain CO during stress.47 Development of hyperdynamic systolic function with LVOT or mid-cavitary obstruction occurs infrequently and could potentially compromise CO.47 Abnormalities of RV structure and function occur in up to 30% to 60% of patients with sepsis, typically in the context of cor pulmonale from severe respiratory failure, and may occasionally impair CO.47
Several pro-inflammatory cytokines along with NO and reactive oxygen species have direct myocardial depressant effects through reductions in intracellular calcium, in addition to direct myocyte injury from inflammatory mediators and immune cells; these are core mechanisms driving myocardial dysfunction in SICM (Figure 2).10,47 Elevated dipeptidyl dipeptidase-3 and adrenomedullin are associated with impaired cardiac contractility and worse outcomes in patients with CS and sepsis; these biomarkers could contribute to mixed shock and have been proposed as targets for therapy.52, 53, 54, 55 Stress-induced cardiomyopathy (eg, apical ballooning or takotsubo syndrome) can occur during the course of any acute illness, resulting in ventricular systolic dysfunction and a risk of LVOT obstruction.49 A sympathetic surge resulting in excessive activation of cardiac beta-adrenergic receptors causing direct myocardial toxicity and downregulation of contractile function is a widely accepted theory for classic stress-induced cardiomyopathy; additional mechanisms include inflammation and microvascular dysfunction or spasm.49 While most patients with stress-induced cardiomyopathy have preserved CO, a low-output state can occur leading to mixed shock when triggered by sepsis. Finally, demand myocardial ischemia and infarction can be triggered by vasodilatory shock and if severe can compromise cardiac function resulting in mixed shock.
Primary mixed shock is characterized by development of both cardiogenic and vasodilatory shock components triggered by a single disease process. Several primary systemic insults can result in either simultaneous or sequential development of both low CO and vasoplegia, resulting in primary mixed shock. For some of these conditions, the hemodynamic shock phenotype evolves from purely cardiogenic to purely vasoplegic, with mixed shock being a temporary intermediate state.
The PCAS arising after resuscitation from cardiac arrest and postcardiotomy syndrome are by far the most common causes of primary mixed shock.56, 57, 58 These conditions are both characterized by myocardial systolic dysfunction which occurs early in the clinical course and is followed by vasoplegia, often with a component of myocardial diastolic dysfunction and relative hypovolemia due to capillary leak. These typically present initially with a low-output state that may respond transiently to volume administration but then requires inotropic support and progresses to vasoplegia which may persist even after myocardial dysfunction has improved. Overdose of several individual drugs (eg, non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, vasodilating beta-blockers, alpha-2 agonists, and tricyclic antidepressants) or a combination of different drugs can trigger simultaneous CS and vasoplegia.59 Fulminant acute myocarditis, infective endocarditis, or severe systemic infections can produce simultaneous cardiogenic and vasodilatory effects, manifesting as primary mixed shock.
Cardiac arrest is common in patients with CS, either as a cause, consequence, or complicating adverse effect modifier resulting in more severe shock, greater organ failure severity, a higher prevalence of SIRS, and worse outcomes.18,20,58 Cardiac arrest is an important trigger for primary mixed shock with its own unique mechanisms. The stereotyped PCAS occurring after resuscitation from cardiac arrest includes both cardiac and vascular dysfunction that can trigger de novo mixed shock or produce a mixed shock state in patients who initially had cardiogenic or vasodilatory shock.30,56 PCAS includes postarrest myocardial dysfunction (PAMD) in most patients, and the combination of PAMD and SIRS can result in an evolving shock phenotype including mixed shock.30,56 PAMD is characterized by acute reversible myocardial stunning with both systolic and diastolic dysfunction superimposed on any pre-existing cardiac pathology.56 Global systemic ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI) is the main pathophysiologic mechanism that drives the PCAS, affecting the heart, brain, and other organs.58 During the low-flow state of cardiac arrest, systemic hypoxia produces accumulation of intracellular sodium and calcium, and after reperfusion this can be aggravated by excessive production of reactive oxygen species; collectively, this triggers harmful intracellular mechanisms including programmed cell death pathways.30 Additional contributors to reversible PAMD include defibrillator shocks, the toxic myocardial effects of high-dose epinephrine, negative inotropic effects of anti-arrhythmic drugs, myocardial ischemia, and adverse myocardial effects of therapeutic hypothermia.56 A delayed SIRS response is typical of the PCAS and is triggered by IRI and other factors (often including infection), further worsening PAMD and producing vasoplegia.30 Elevated inflammatory markers are common in patients with PCAS, and generally correlate with the severity of shock and need for vasopressors, predicting worse outcomes.33,60, 61, 62, 63 PAMD tends to be an early phenomenon (during the first 6-24 hours), while vasodilation from SIRS tends to occur later (after 12-24 hours) as patients progress from pure CS to mixed shock to pure vasodilatory shock.56
Postcardiotomy shock, occurring in 5% to 20% of patients after cardiac surgery (depending on the definition) and triggered by cardioplegia and prolonged cardiopulmonary bypass, carries substantial clinical and pathophysiologic similarities to the PCAS.3,57 In both circumstances, myocardial and systemic IRI occurs and often triggers a SIRS response with concomitant cardiac dysfunction and vasoplegia.56 Postcardiotomy shock may include unique features distinct from PAMD, such as predominant right ventricular dysfunction (eg, from coronary air embolism) and the effects of opening the pericardium on cardiac function.57
Patients with mixed shock typically present with severe or worsening shock including vasopressor-dependent hypotension and clinical and laboratory evidence of hypoperfusion and end-organ dysfunction. Usually, a patient will start with typical signs of either cardiogenic or vasodilatory shock and then develop evidence of poor or worsening perfusion and escalating need for hemodynamic support. A key indicator of the evolution to mixed shock is reversal of expected clinical and hemodynamic findings compared to the initial diagnosis of either cardiogenic or vasodilatory shock, or the presence of conflicting findings regarding the assessment of CO and SVR. The central or mixed venous oxygen saturation (SVO2) can be a useful biomarker indicating the development of mixed shock but must be interpreted in the context of arterial oxygenation, hemoglobin, and metabolic demands. For patients with an initial cardiogenic phenotype, mixed shock may be heralded by the development of an unexpectedly high or rising SVO2 or physical examination findings suggesting vasodilation (eg, warm extremities, strong distal pulses, and wide pulse pressure with low diastolic pressure). Conversely, for patients with an initial vasodilatory phenotype, mixed shock may be heralded by the development of an unexpectedly low or dropping SVO2 or physical examination findings suggesting vasoconstriction (eg, cool extremities, weak distal pulses, and narrow pulse pressure with low systolic pressure). Primary mixed shock often evolves from one phenotype to the other, with changing clinical findings over time.
Most patients with mixed shock have evidence of systemic inflammation, with neutrophilic leukocytosis, a high neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio, and elevated levels of inflammatory markers (eg, C-reactive protein and cytokines); fevers may be present, but none of these findings is specific for infection.9,11,15,17, 18, 19,34 Patients with mixed shock should be evaluated thoroughly for infection, with blood and (if indicated) urine or respiratory cultures, appropriate imaging, and prompt initiation of empiric broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy until infection can be ruled out; potential sources of catheter and line-related infection should be removed if possible.21,46
The diagnosis of mixed shock can be difficult to make without invasive hemodynamic monitoring to measure CO and SVR directly. A PAC is indispensable for providing minute-to-minute real-time invasive hemodynamic monitoring including biventricular filling pressures, CO, and SVR to assess the response to treatment and adjust therapies to achieve therapeutic goals. As in all patients with severe or worsening CS, PAC placement is advisable and represents the gold standard for diagnosis in mixed shock.2 Use of PACs, particularly when complete hemodynamic data are obtained, has been associated with better outcomes in CS patients in observational studies.6,64 When a PAC is not available, CO may be estimated using minimally invasive (arterial pulse contour monitoring) or noninvasive (echocardiography) testing and the SVR can be extrapolated based on these estimated CO values.
For patients with evidence of mixed shock (particularly vasodilatory-CS), an evaluation for new or worsening cardiac dysfunction is indicated. Evaluation for myocardial ischemia using cardiac biomarkers and electrocardiography should be pursued. Bedside echocardiography is a crucial diagnostic test for identifying wall motion abnormalities which may indicate ischemia, in addition to providing invaluable information regarding cardiac structure and function to identify potential contributors to impaired cardiac performance. Abnormal ventricular systolic function is neither necessary nor sufficient to confirm a reduced CO, and a focused hemodynamic assessment is essential for the diagnosis.47,50 When acute myocardial ischemia is associated with new or worsening cardiac dysfunction, coronary angiography should be considered.2
For patients with mixed shock, an assessment of preload-responsiveness can be followed by a cautious crystalloid bolus (eg, 3-4 ml/kg) in the absence of manifest congestion, recognizing that static filling pressures alone are a poor marker of volume response.2,65 Many patients with vasodilatory-CS have already received volume resuscitation for sepsis (ie, guideline-congruent 30 ml/kg), and in some cases diuresis may be needed to treat congestion.46 After initial resuscitation, conservative or restrictive fluid management is beneficial in most critically ill patients, and likely to be appropriate in patients with mixed shock.66
There are no randomized trials examining patient-centered outcomes for patients with mixed shock, forcing us to extrapolate from patients with cardiogenic or septic shock in whom vasoactive medications are ubiquitously used to restore adequate systemic hemodynamics and perfusion.1,2,67 Titrating vasoactive medications to restore hemodynamics is facilitated by the use of invasive hemodynamic monitoring to guide therapy in patients with mixed shock. Separate titration of inotropes (drugs that increase myocardial contractility) to adequate CO and vasopressor agents (drugs that increase SVR via vasoconstriction) to adequate MAP is suggested (Figure 3).67 Discontinuing or reducing the dose of medications that can aggravate the mixed shock state is essential, including inodilator or sedative drugs.67

Overview of Hemodynamic Support in Mixed Shock
Vasopressors (drugs that cause vasoconstriction and increase systemic vascular resistance) and adjunct drugs that inhibit vasodilation are titrated to restore mean arterial pressure, while inotropes (drugs that stimulate myocardial contractility) and mechanical circulatory support are titrated to restore cardiac output VA. ECMO = venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenator.
The vascular (ie, vasoconstrictor or vasodilator) properties must be considered when selecting inotropic drugs in mixed shock patients whose low vascular tone makes them more susceptible to vasodilatory effects (Figure 4).67 Inodilators used to increase CO include dobutamine, milrinone, and levosimendan (not available in the United States).2,67,68 All of these drugs can trigger or exacerbate vasodilatory hypotension in patients with mixed shock, and none has demonstrated a clear advantage for patient-centered outcomes.68 Low dose inoconstrictors (eg, low-dose epinephrine up to 0.1 mcg/kg/min) may be added or substituted for inotropic support when an inodilator aggravates vasodilatory hypotension or for patients with vasodilatory-CS from sepsis.46,67 Ideally, markers of tissue perfusion such as capillary refill time should be normalized in concert with restoration of CO.39,41,69

Integration of Central Hemodynamics and Perfusion in Selection of Support Therapies in Mixed Shock
The vascular effects of vasoactive drugs must be considered when selecting inotropes and vasopressors in patients with mixed shock, as these drugs can potentially improve or worsen vasodilation or low cardiac output. PAC = pulmonary artery catheter; SVO2 = venous oxygen saturation; other abbreviation as in Figure 3.
Societal guidelines recommend norepinephrine as the first-choice vasopressor for both cardiogenic and septic shock, making norepinephrine an appropriate first-line vasopressor for most patients with mixed shock.2,46,67 Norepinephrine largely acts as a peripheral vasoconstrictor with modest inotropic properties.67 Randomized trials in patients with CS and septic shock have demonstrated that norepinephrine is associated with a lower risk of adverse events (eg, arrhythmias) when used as the first-line vasopressor compared with high doses of epinephrine or dopamine.2,46,67,68,70 The potential advantages of norepinephrine appear greater when higher vasopressor doses are required, as is often the case in mixed shock.71,72
Pure vasoconstrictors can be used as adjunctive catecholamine-sparing vasopressors for patients with significant vasoplegia, including vasopressin, angiotensin-II, and phenylephrine.40,46,67 The main limitation of these drugs is the reduction in CO that can occur via increased afterload and sympathetic withdrawal, and they should only be used after CO is normalized.67 Phenylephrine and vasopressin are particularly useful in vasodilated patients with hyperdynamic LV function and LVOT obstruction.73 For other patients with mixed shock and severe vasoplegia, addition of a pure vasoconstrictor can be considered when high-dose norepinephrine (eg, >0.2 μg/kg/min) is ineffective or associated with arrhythmias.40 In general, vasopressin is the preferred second-line vasopressor for most vasoplegic states including sepsis and the postcardiotomy syndrome.40,46,57,67,74 Limited studies suggest that vasopressin may be able to improve MAP in patients with severe CS, implying a role in mixed cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock.75,76 We rarely use phenylephrine, which tends to cause excessive vasoconstriction and tissue ischemia and has less hemodynamic efficacy.67 Angiotensin-II can increase MAP in vasodilatory shock with high norepinephrine requirements but is contraindicated in patients with a low-output syndrome.40,67,77 Addition of angiotensin-II to norepinephrine and vasopressin may have favorable effects on the kidneys in patients with severe vasoplegia but can increase RV afterload unlike vasopressin.40,77
When combination vasopressor therapy is inadequate to restore vascular tone and MAP, adjunctive agents are considered. While several of these therapies have been shown to improve MAP in patients with cardiogenic or septic shock, none has been shown to improve survival and they are understudied in mixed shock leaving uncertainty about when they should be utilized. The most commonly described adjunct for vasoplegia is stress-dose hydrocortisone (eg, 200 mg/day), which can improve MAP and reduce vasopressor requirements in patients with severe septic shock; however, improvement in patient-centered outcomes remains uncertain.43,46 Given the potential for relative adrenal insufficiency in patients with CS, it is possible that stress-dose corticosteroids might improve vasoplegia in mixed cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock.42 There is uncertainty about how to identify patients who are likely to respond to corticosteroids, making empiric therapy reasonable for patients with mixed shock who require high vasopressor doses or multiple vasopressors.40,43,46
Due to the involvement of excessive NO release as a core driver of vasoplegia, the use of NOS inhibitors has been examined in both septic and cardiogenic shock.38,78,79 While these agents were effective at increasing MAP and decreasing vasopressor requirements, they did not improve survival and a signal of potential harm was suggested.38,78,79 Nonselective NOS inhibition reduces the harmful effects of excessive systemic NO production on the macrocirculation, at the cost of blocking the potentially beneficial effects of local NO production on the microcirculation and immune function.40 Accordingly, systemic NO inhibition is not an accepted strategy for patients with septic or cardiogenic shock.2,46 Nonetheless, the use of contemporary NO inhibitors such as methylene blue and hydroxycobalamin is well described in patients with vasoplegia, particularly after cardiac surgery.57,80 Like their predecessors studied in septic and cardiogenic shock, these drugs can increase MAP and SVR; however, data on improving survival outcomes are lacking.38,78, 79, 80 Therefore, NO inhibitors are a third-line strategy when adequate vascular tone cannot be restored with multiple vasopressors at doses that do not elicit toxicity, and further data are needed to determine their safety.40 Correction of severe metabolic alkalosis (eg, with alkali therapy) or severe ionized hypocalcemia (eg, with calcium chloride) can transiently improve MAP in shock without clear effects on survival.40
The rationale for the use of MCS devices in CS is centered on their ability to improve systemic and coronary perfusion, reduce cardiac filling pressures, facilitate revascularization, reduce vasoactive medication doses, all in order to interrupt the downward shock spiral of tissue hypoperfusion, end-organ failure, and death.2,81 In patients with CS, MCS devices increase CO which increases MAP, although the effect on MAP may limited by vasoplegia in mixed shock. The intra-aortic balloon pump in particular functions by reducing effective LV afterload and tends to be ineffective in patients who are vasoplegic, have low SVR, and/or require high vasopressor doses (ie, those with mixed shock).82 MCS devices such as percutaneous ventricular assist devices or VA ECMO generate a fixed amount of flow, which may be inadequate to restore MAP for patients who are vasoplegic.
The few randomized controlled trials examining the use of temporary MCS in broad cohorts with CS have failed to demonstrate improvement in clinical outcomes, which may be due to either lack of device efficacy or limitations in trial design or implementation.83,84 Nonetheless, the use of temporary MCS in selected CS patients may result in improved survival.85 Generally, MCS is more appropriate for patients with primary CS resulting in mixed cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock, noting that mixed shock may develop or be unmasked after MCS device deployment. Device selection is best tailored to the specific etiology and hemodynamic phenotype (ideally guided by a PAC) and typically must be combined with vasoactive therapy to maintain SVR in mixed shock.81 A multidisciplinary “Shock Team” has been associated with better outcomes in patients with CS and could be particularly useful for patients with mixed shock of all subtypes (including those without primary CS) considering to their complex hemodynamics.28
Owing to its greater capacity to provide flow and support both ventricles, VA ECMO is commonly used for refractory mixed shock.48 Studies in patients with CS (primarily AMI-CS) have not demonstrated improved survival with early VA ECMO; patients enrolled in these studies received high doses of vasopressors and some likely had mixed cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock.83,84 Specific data regarding the use of VA ECMO in mixed shock comes primarily from observational studies of patients with vasodilatory-CS with severe SICM.48 These studies emphasize that patients with lower left ventricular ejection fraction appear more likely to benefit from VA ECMO, presumably because there is a greater cardiogenic component to their shock syndrome.48 Provision of adequate ECMO flows for patients with severe vasoplegia can be challenging and may require addition of a second venous drainage cannula. The use of VA ECMO is associated with a substantial risk of complications and should be reserved only for patients with refractory shock in whom less-invasive therapies fail.48,84
Patients with mixed shock continue to have high morbidity and mortality, and many important scientific questions must be addressed given their unmet clinical needs (Table 2). Novel scientific approaches and emergence of newer therapies represent important strategies to mitigate the lethal burden of mixed shock. The “host response” to myocardial injury and end-organ failure in CS and mixed shock may be maladaptive and deleterious, and potential targets for therapy to limit these harmful mechanisms need to be identified.86,87
Research Priorities in Mixed Shock
Standardize definitions of mixed cardiogenic and distributive shock
Elucidate mixed shock outcomes in CICU, medical intensive care unit, and other intensive care units
Develop and validate risk prediction models for short- and long-term survival
Develop a reproducible model of mixed shock to elucidate novel pathways of injury and disease in mixed shock
Examine role and contribution of impaired microcirculation and inappropriate vasodilation
Perform RCT examining first or second vasopressor agent in mixed shock (ie, norepinephrine vs epinephrine)
Design RCT examining role and timing of hemodynamics to guide initial treatment selection
Identify optimal physiological and hemodynamic targets
Evaluate invasive mechanical ventilation strategies
Clarify timing and role of inotropic and vasoactive and temporary MCS support
Elucidate timing and role of renal replacement therapy
Identify disease-based CICU quality and safety metrics
Prevent and manage critical care complications
Identify potential role of shock survivorship clinics and management of long-term sequelae
Examine care delivery and staffing models
Evaluate comparative effectiveness of therapeutic strategies
Develop and validate clinically relevant clusters using machine learning/artificial intelligence approaches
Employ causal inferential methods in observational registry-based data
CICU = cardiac intensive care unit; MCS = mechanical circulatory support; RCT = randomized controlled trial.
Clear diagnostic criteria are needed to enable generation of better epidemiological data to understand the true disease burden, for example, for SICM or mixed cardiogenic-vasodilatory shock. Research priorities should include a standardized definition for mixed shock for both clinical trials and contemporary practice. Consensus definitions for CS and septic shock fail to precisely define mixed shock, which limits both registry-based research endeavors and the conduct and reporting of clinical trials.3,46 Perhaps an expert panel approach convening a multi-stakeholder collaboration including clinicians, investigators, industry representatives, regulators, and payers may help to generate consensus definitions for safety and outcomes in mixed shock to promote clarity and consistency in future research, analogous to the Shock Academic Research Consortium statement on CS.3
Mechanistic studies should further elucidate the complex pathophysiology of mixed shock by highlighting which specific cytokines and secondary signaling pathways are most important for causing the hemodynamic disturbances and adverse prognosis. It is essential to determine whether different etiologies of mixed shock (eg, cardiogenic-vasodilatory versus vasodilatory-cardiogenic) have divergent biomarker patterns and/or which final common pathways are involved in disease progression. The various mechanisms underlying SICM and inflammation-associated myocardial dysfunction have not been fully elucidated, and potential targets of therapy must be identified.47 Machine learning approaches have been applied in pure CS and may be useful in determining clinically relevant clusters in mixed shock; underlying biomarker patterns unmasked using machine learning could provide insights into the mechanistic differences between cardiogenic-vasodilatory and vasodilatory-CS.44,45
A crucial requirement is for the transition from a syndromic classification of mixed shock to defining subphenotypes and treatable traits that can be used to guide therapy.44,45
Subphenotypes link patient subgroups based on clinical and biochemical markers as well as disease pathobiology and may allow for identification and characterization of those patients, while a treatable trait is a component of a subphenotype that identifies an individual with a better response to a specific treatment. Presumably, different subphenotypes will require divergent diagnostic and therapeutic approaches, which could involve different molecular targets. Identification of distinct subphenotypes and treatable traits in mixed shock can be potentially used for predictive enrichment in future clinical trials.
On a practical level, the optimal approach to diagnosis, monitoring, and prognostication of mixed shock (eg, integrating noninvasive modalities such as echocardiography with invasive hemodynamic monitoring) at bedside is needed and may guide selection of therapeutic targets for hemodynamic support. Identifying the optimal MAP targets in various phenotypes of mixed shock is of utmost importance (particularly as low SVR will disproportionately lower the diastolic blood pressure and MAP), as is the optimal approach to the selection and titration of vasoactive drugs and MCS. Several adjunctive therapies have been explored to a limited extent in septic shock or CS, but not in mixed shock; most of these therapies have some effect on MAP but this has not been consistently translated to an improvement in patient-centered outcomes including mortality, necessitating randomized trials.38,46,48,62,66,74,75,78, 79, 80,88 The microcirculation has central importance in both cardiogenic and septic shock as a determinant of tissue perfusion and outcomes, raising questions about how best to monitor and resuscitate the microcirculation in mixed shock.10,39
Mixed shock is a hemodynamically complex, multifactorial, heterogenous syndrome involving a diverse group of etiologies ultimately resulting in a combined hemodynamic lesion associated with greater vasopressor requirements, higher severity of illness, and worse outcomes than typical shock phenotypes. The adverse effects of systemic inflammation on cardiac and vascular function commonly drive mixed shock regardless of the cause, which may be initially cardiogenic or vasodilatory before evolving to a mixed state. Due to the lack of a consensus definition, patients with mixed shock have not been extensively studied, precluding robust analyses or evidence-based recommendations from professional societies. Invasive hemodynamic monitoring is important to identify and manage patients with mixed shock, who typically present with late decompensation in a patient with cardiogenic or vasodilatory shock. Rational combination vasopressor and inotrope therapy must be titrated judiciously based on hemodynamic monitoring, and MCS may be less effective for raising MAP in severely vasoplegic patients. Considering that patients with mixed shock often include the most critically ill patients with refractory shock, greater research efforts are needed to understand the role of adjunctive therapies in this high-risk population.
This study was sponsored by the ACC Critical Care Cardiology and Interventional Cardiology Sections.
The authors would like to acknowledge the expert review and suggestions provided for this manuscript by Drs Steven M. Hollenberg, Patrick R. Lawler, and David A. Morrow.
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information, visit the Author Center.
Articles from JACC: Advances are provided here courtesy of Elsevier

==================================================

